{\rtf1\ansi\deff3\adeflang1025{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Serif{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Sans{\*\falt Arial};}{\f5\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Noto Sans CJK SC;}{\f6\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Lohit Devanagari;}{\f7\fnil\fprq0\fcharset128 Lohit Devanagari;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\s0\snext0\hich\af3\dbch\af8\langfe2052\dbch\af6\afs24\alang1081\widctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\kerning1 Normal;}{\*\cs15\snext15 Footnote Characters;}{\*\cs16\snext16\super Footnote Anchor;}{\*\cs17\snext17\super Endnote Anchor;}{\*\cs18\snext18 Endnote Characters;}{\s19\sbasedon0\snext20\dbch\af5\dbch\af6\afs28\sb240\sa120\keepn\loch\f4\fs28 Heading;}{\s20\sbasedon0\snext20\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140 Text Body;}{\s21\sbasedon20\snext21\dbch\af7\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140 List;}{\s22\sbasedon0\snext22\dbch\af7\afs24\ai\sb120\sa120\noline\fs24\i Caption;}{\s23\sbasedon0\snext23\dbch\af7\noline Index;}{\s24\sbasedon0\snext24\afs20\li339\ri0\lin339\rin0\fi-339\noline\fs20 Footnote;}}{\*\generator LibreOffice/6.4.7.2$Linux_X86_64 LibreOffice_project/40$Build-2}{\info{\creatim\yr2022\mo3\dy21\hr14\min35}{\revtim\yr2022\mo3\dy21\hr14\min35}{\printim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}}{\*\userprops}\deftab709\hyphauto1\viewscale120
{\*\pgdsctbl{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse451\pgwsxn11906\pghsxn16838\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\pgdscnxt0 Default Style;}}
\formshade\paperh16838\paperw11906\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134\sectd\sbknone\sectunlocked1\pgndec\pgwsxn11906\pghsxn16838\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
{\*\ftnsep\chftnsep}\pgndec\ql\ltrpar\pard\plain \s0\hich\af3\dbch\af8\langfe2052\dbch\af6\afs24\alang1081\widctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\loch\f3\fs24\lang2057\kerning1\ql\ltrpar
\par{\b [  V{\u7771}{\u7779}as{\u257}rasa{\u7747}graha{\u7717} 
 ]}
\par{\b [  prathamo 'dhy{\u257}ya{\u7717} 
 ]}
\par[ Chapter 1  ]\par
\par an{\u257}dimadhy{\u257}ntam anantap{\u257}ra{\u7747}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }1a {\b {\u176}ntam ananta{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}<corr>pc</corr>{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}ntam anta{\u176} {Cb}<corr>ac</corr>{\u8226}

        {\b {\u176}p{\u257}ra{\u7747}] }  {C}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}p{\u257}raga{\u7747} {Na}{Nb}\msNd}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }1 <SKT>cf. Śivadharmottara 10.6: </SKT>

                {\u257}dimadhy{\u257}ntanirmukta{\u7717} svabh{\u257}vavimala{\u7717} prabhu{\u7717} |

                sarvaj{\u241}a{\u7717} parip{\u363}r{\u7751}a{\u347} ca {\u347}ivo j{\u241}eya{\u7717} {\u347}iv{\u257}game ||}

\par sus{\u363}k{\u7779}mam avyaktajagatsus{\u257}ram|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }1b {\b sus{\u363}k{\u7779}ma{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u347}usuk{\u7779}ma{\u176} {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}jagatsus{\u257}ram] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}jaga{\u347}us{\u257}ra{\u7747} {Cc}, {\u176}jagatsur{\u257}sura{\u7747} {Nb},

                                                                                {\u176}jagatasus{\u257}ram \msNd}

\par har{\u299}ndrabrahm{\u257}dibhir {\u257}samagra{\u7747}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }1c {\b {\u176}bhir {\u257}samagra{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd{Ed};

                                                                {\u176}bhir yat samagra{\u7747} \msM\ (<i>unmetrical</i>)}

\par pra{\u7751}amya vak{\u7779}ye v{\u7771}{\u7779}as{\u257}rasa{\u7747}graham||1.1||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }1c {\b v{\u7771}{\u7779}a{\u176}] }  {Ca}<corr>pc</corr>{Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}v{\u7771}{\u7779}o {Ca}<corr>ac</corr>}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }1<SKT>Testimonia for this chapter:    {Ca}\ ff.\thinspace 193v-195v,

                                                {Cb}\ ff.\thinspace 201v-203v,

                                                {Cc}\ ff.\thinspace 267r-270r,

                                                {Na}\ ff.\thinspace 1v-3v,

                                                {Nb}\ exp.\thinspace 44 (then exp.\thinspace

                                                        43 lower and then upper leaves; 1.62cd-2.22 are missing),

                                                {Nc}\ ff.\thinspace 209v-211v,

                                                \msNd\ ff.\thinspace 227v-229v; 

                                                \msM\  ff.\thinspace 1r-3v;

                                                {C}\ = {Ca} + {Cb} + {Cc}; 

                                                lemmata in parentheses indicate a longer chuck of text for

                                                which there may be additional variants given in the apparatus</SKT>}

{\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }<SKT>P{\u257}da</SKT> a is reminiscent of, among other famous passages, Bhagavadg{\u299}t{\u257} 11.19:

<sep/>
<SKT>an{\u257}dimadhy{\u257}ntam anantav{\u299}ryam <br/>
anantab{\u257}hu{\u7747} {\u347}a{\u347}is{\u363}ryanetram | <br/>
pa{\u347}y{\u257}mi tv{\u257}{\u7747} d{\u299}ptahut{\u257}{\u347}avaktra{\u7747} <br/>
svatejas{\u257} vi{\u347}vam ida{\u7747} tapantam ||</SKT>
<sep/>

This faint reference to the Bhagavadg{\u299}t{\u257} seems proper at the
beginning of a work that claims to deliver a teaching 
based on, but also to surpass, the Mah{\u257}bh{\u257}rata (see following verses).
See also e.g. K{\u363}rmapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.11.237:

<sep/>
        <SKT>r{\u363}pa{\u7747} tav{\u257}{\u347}e{\u7779}akal{\u257}vih{\u299}nam<br/>
        agocara{\u7747} nirmalam ekar{\u363}pam | <br/>
        an{\u257}dimadhy{\u257}ntam anantam {\u257}dya{\u7747}  <br/>
        nam{\u257}mi satya{\u7747} tamasa{\u7717} parast{\u257}t</SKT> ||
<sep/>

To say that a god has no beginning and no
end in a temporal or spacial sense is natural
(<SKT>an{\u257}di{\u176}...{\u176}antam</SKT>), but to have no `middle
part' (<SKT>{\u176}madhya{\u176}</SKT>) in these senses is slightly
less so.  Thus the rather commonly occuring
phrase <SKT>an{\u257}dimadhy{\u257}ntam</SKT> is probably 
a fixed expression usually referring to 
a formless, abstrace deity that is endless, eternal and immaterial.
As to which deity or what form of a deity this stanza 
refers to, it may be Śiva, his name not being
listed explicitely in p{\u257}da c,
but the phrasing of the verse is vague enough to
keep the question somewhat open: the impersonal
Brahman might be another option, even more so
if we look at 1.9-10, two verses nearby 
discussing <SKT>brahmavidy{\u257}</SKT>.
                
<sep/>
In <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> b <SKT>jagat-sus{\u257}ra{\u7747}</SKT> is most probably not 
to be interpreted as <SKT>jagatsu s{\u257}ra{\u7747}</SKT> (`the essence in the worlds').

<sep/>
Strictly speaking, <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> c is unmetrical, but it is better to 
simply acknowledge here the phenomenon of `muta cum liquida', namely
that syllables followed by consonant clusters such as 
<SKT>ra, bra, hra, kra, {\u347}ra, {\u347}ya, {\u347}va, sva, dva</SKT> can be treated as short.
(See Introduction CHECK)
Thus <SKT>har{\u299}ndrabrahm{\u257}{\u176}</SKT> can be treated as a regular beginning
of an <SKT>upaj{\u257}ti</SKT> (. - . - -), the syllable 
<SKT>bra</SKT> not turning the previous syllable long.

<sep/>
The reading <SKT>{\u257}samagra{\u7747}</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> c is suspect,
although the initial <SKT>{\u257}-</SKT> might convey the meaning of
completeness (See e.g. Kale Higher Grammar, 126).
The fact that we could percieve
the ends of <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s a and b, as well as <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s c and
d, as rhyming pairs suggests that accepting the reading
<SKT>{\u257}samagram</SKT> can be the right decision
(as suggested by Alessandro Battistini).
I translate this verse accordingly. \msM\ gives an exciting,
albeit unmetrical, alternative (<SKT>yat samagra{\u7747}</SKT>), but
this seems more like a guess to me than the correct reading.
For some time I was considering emending <SKT>{\u257}samagra{\u7747}</SKT>.
The most tempting of all the possible options 
(<SKT>arcyam/arhyam/arghyam/{\u299}{\u7693}yam/{\u257}{\u7693}hyam agra{\u7747}, {\u257}samasta{\u7747}</SKT>) 
seemed to be <SKT>{\u257}ptam agra{\u7747}</SKT>,
meaning `appointed/received/respected [by Hari, Indra,
Brahm{\u257} etc.] as the foremost one'. The fact that 
the <SKT>ak{\u7779}ara</SKT>s <SKT>{\u257}sam</SKT> and <SKT>{\u257}ptam</SKT> look similar in most
of the scripts used in our manuscripts could support this
conjecture. <SKT>Āptam</SKT> could also
possibly refer to the text itself, although then the
syntax becomes slightly confusing: `I shall recite the
<SKT>V{\u7771}{\u7779}as{\u257}rasa{\u7747}graha</SKT> that was first received by Hari...' etc.
Another candidate was <SKT>{\u257}{\u7693}hyam agram</SKT>:
`Having bowed to [Him] who contains Hari, Indra, Brahm{\u257}
etc.' I have not emended the text because it is difficult
to know if any change is required and if yes, which reading 
to chose. There was no consensus when
this verse was discussed in our extended Śivadharma reading group.

<sep/>
P{\u257}da d seems hypermetrical, but it can be interpreted as a <SKT>va{\u7747}{\u347}astha</SKT>
line, a change from <SKT>tri{\u7779}{\u7789}ubh</SKT> to <SKT>jagat{\u299}</SKT> (as suggested by Dominic Goodall).  
}

\par{\b [  janamejayavai{\u347}amp{\u257}yanasa{\u7747}v{\u257}da{\u7717} 
 ]}
\par {\u347}atas{\u257}hasrika{\u7747} grantha{\u7747} sahasr{\u257}dhy{\u257}yam uttamam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }2b {\b sahasr{\u257}dhy{\u257}yam u{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM; saha{\u347}radhy{\u257}yam u{\u176} {Cc},

                                                        sahasr{\u257}dhy{\u257}yar u{\u176} {Ed}}

\par parva c{\u257}sya {\u347}ata{\u7747} p{\u363}r{\u7751}a{\u7747} {\u347}rutv{\u257} bh{\u257}ratasa{\u7747}hit{\u257}m||1.2||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }2c {\b parva c{\u257}sya] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM<corr>pc</corr>; parva{\u241} c{\u257}sya {Cb},

                                                 parvam asya {Cc}\msNd\msM<corr>ac</corr>{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u347}ata{\u7747} p{\u363}r{\u7751}a{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; ta {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }2d {\b {\u347}rutv{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u347}raddh{\u257} {Cb}{\u8226}

                 {\b bh{\u257}ratasa{\u7747}hit{\u257}m] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; bh{\u257}rasa{\u7747}hit{\u257} {Cc},

                                         bh{\u257}ratasa{\u7747}hita{\u7747} \msNd, n{\u257}r{\u257}dasa{\u7747}hit{\u257}m {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }2 <SKT> cf. MBh 1.2.70ab: </SKT> etat parva{\u347}ata{\u7747} p{\u363}r{\u7751}a{\u7747} vy{\u257}senokta{\u7747} mah{\u257}tman{\u257}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The dialogue of Janamejaya and Vai{\u347}amp{\u257}yana make up the outermost layer of the VSS 
                (except for the introductory stanzas 1.1-3), mostly containing
                general <SKT>dharma{\u347}{\u257}stric</SKT> material.
                <sep/>
                The hundred <SKT>parvan</SKT>s of the Mah{\u257}bh{\u257}rata are listed in MBh 1.2.33-70.}

\par at{\u7771}pta{\u7717} puna papraccha vai{\u347}amp{\u257}yanam eva hi|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }3a {\b at{\u7771}pta{\u7717} puna papraccha] }  {\i eme. };

                a{\u8768}t{\u7771}pta{\u7717} pu{\u8768}¤¤praccha {Ca}, 

                at{\u7771}pta{\u7717} puna{\u7717} papraccha {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc},

                at{\u7771}pta{\u7717} punar apracche {Cc},

                at{\u7771}pta{\u7717} puna pa{\u7717}praccha \msNd,

                at{\u7771}pta{\u7717} puna{\u7717} pap{\u7771}ccha \msM,

                at{\u7771}pt{\u257} puna{\u7717} papraccha {Ed}} 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }3b {\b vai{\u347}amp{\u257}yana{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; vesamp{\u257}yana{\u176} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }For a similar unsatisfaction or dissatisfaction with previous 
                teachings, see Ni{\u347}v{\u257}sa m{\u363}la 1.9:
                <sep/>
                <skt>ved{\u257}nta{\u7747} vidita{\u7747} deva s{\u257}{\u7747}khya{\u7747} vai pa{\u241}cavi{\u7747}{\u347}akam |
                     na ca t{\u7771}pti{\u7747} gami{\u7779}y{\u257}mo hy {\u7771}te {\u347}aiv{\u257}d anugrah{\u257}t ||</skt>
                <sep/>
                 and Śivadharma{\u347}{\u257}stra... CHECK.}

\par janamejaya yat p{\u363}rva{\u7747} tac ch{\u7771}{\u7751}u tvam atandrita{\u7717}||1.3||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }3c {\b janamejaya yat p{\u363}rva{\u7747}] }  {\i eme. };

                  janamejayena yat p{\u363}rva{\u7747} {Ca}<corr>pc</corr>{Cb}{Nc}\msNd{Ed},

                  janamejaye yat p{\u363}rva{\u7747} {Ca}<corr>ac</corr>,

                  janmejayena yam p{\u363}rva{\u7747} {Cc},

                  janamejayena yat p{\u363}rva {Na},

                  janamejayena yat p{\u363}r{\u8768}va{\u8768} {Nb},

                  janmejaye{\u7751}a yat p{\u363}rva{\u7747} \msM}

          {\footnote {\chftn ) }3d {\b tac ch{\u7771}{\u7751}u tvam a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed};

                                 tac ch{\u7771}{\u7751}a tvam a{\u176} {Cc}, ×××××  {Nb}, tac ch{\u7771}{\u7751}u svam a{\u176} \msNd{\u8226}

                   {\b {\u176}tandrita{\u7717}] }  {Cc}{Na}; {\u176}tandritam {Ca}{Cb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed},

                                                ××× {Nb}}

		{\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Vai{\u347}amp{\u257}yana, a Ṛ{\u7779}i, the disciple of Vy{\u257}sa, great-grandson to Arjuna,
		recited the Mah{\u257}bh{\u257}rata at the snake sacrifice of 
                Janamejaya. This setting is an echo of the starting point of the Mah{\u257}bh{\u257}rata, see MBh 1.1.8ff.
                In fact the next few verses in the VSS make it clear that we the VSS
                picks up where the Mah{\u257}bh{\u257}rata left off: Janamejaya has heard the whole Mah{\u257}bh{\u257}rata from
                Vai{\u347}amp{\u257}yana, but he is eager to hear more.
                <sep/>
                Note how we are forced to emend <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> c to contain a stem form proper noun (<SKT>janamejaya</SKT>)
                to maintain the metre, and note how the manuscripts struggle with this <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>.
                Stem form nouns, <SKT>pr{\u257}tipadika</SKT>s, abound in the VSS, see Introdcution p. XXCHECK.
        }

\par janamejaya uv{\u257}ca| 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }4 {\b janamejaya] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; janmejaya {Cc}}

\par bhagavan sarvadharmaj{\u241}a sarva{\u347}{\u257}stravi{\u347}{\u257}rada|

       {\footnote {\chftn ) }4a {\b bhagavan sa{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; bhac{\u257}va{\u7747} sa{\u176} {Cc}, bhagava sa{\u176} \msNd,

                                                                bhagava{\u7747} sa{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                {\b {\u176}dharmaj{\u241}a] }  {C}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}j{\u241}a {Na}, {\u176}dharmaj{\u241}a{\u7717} \msNd}

       {\footnote {\chftn ) }4b {\b {\u176}vi{\u347}{\u257}rada] }  {Ca}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd; {\u176}vis{\u257}rada{\u7717} {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Ed}, {\u176}vi{\u347}{\u257}radam \msM}

\par asti dharma{\u7747} para{\u7747} guhya{\u7747} sa{\u7747}s{\u257}r{\u257}r{\u7751}avat{\u257}ra{\u7751}am||1.4||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }4d {\b asti dharma{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; asti dharma{\u7717} {Cb}, asti dharma {Cc}\msM, adharma \msNd{\u8226}

                 {\b para{\u7747} guhya{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Nb}\msNd\msM{Ed}; paro guhya {Cb}, para{\u7747} guhya {Cc}{Na}, paraguhya{\u7747} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note <SKT>dharma</SKT> as a neuter noun in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> c and in the next verse.} ->

\par dvaip{\u257}yanamukhodg{\u299}r{\u7751}a{\u7747} dharma{\u7747} v{\u257} yad dvijottama|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }5a {\b dvaip{\u257}yana{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; dvep{\u257}yana{\u176} {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}mukhodg{\u299}r{\u7751}a{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}mukhodg{\u299}r{\u7751}a {Cc}, {\u176}mudg{\u299}r{\u7751}{\u7751}a \msNd,

                                                mukha{\u7747} g{\u299}r{\u7751}{\u7751}a{\u7747} \msM<corr>ac</corr>, mu{\u8768}kh{\u257}{\u7747}{\u8768} g{\u299}r{\u7751}{\u7751}a{\u7747} \msM<corr>pc</corr>,

                                                mukh{\u257}d g{\u299}r{\u7751}a{\u7747} {Ed}}

                {\footnote {\chftn ) }5b {\b dharma{\u7747} v{\u257} yad dvi{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; dharma{\u7747} yat tad dvi{\u176} {Cb},

                                                dharmavat ya dvi{\u176} {Cc}, dharma v{\u257} yad dvi{\u176} \msNd,

                                                dharmav{\u257}kya{\u7747} dvi{\u176} \msM{\u8226} 

                  {\b {\u176}ttama] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd{Ed}; {\u176}ttama{\u7717} {Cc}, {\u176}tama{\u7717} \msM}  

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The majority of the MSS consulted include a <SKT>v{\u257}</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> b, 
                and although {Cb}'s reading seems a bit smoother, that manuscript rarely gives superior readings.
                Therefore I have chosen <SKT>dharma{\u7747} v{\u257} yad</SKT>, in which <SKT>v{\u257}</SKT> is probably in a weak sense.
                That the secret Dharma Janamejaya is seeking is the one taught by Vy{\u257}sa Dvaip{\u257}yana,
                thus no real options are involved here, becomes clear in 1.6cd.
                The reading of \msM\ is tempting but could be a later correction.}

\par kathayasva hi me t{\u7771}pti{\u7747} kuru yatn{\u257}t tapodhana||1.5||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }5c {\b hi me t{\u7771}pti{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; hi me t{\u7771}pti \msNd, pras{\u257}dena \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }5d {\b yatn{\u257}t tapodhana] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; yann{\u257}t ta¤¤na {Ca},

                                        yatn{\u257} tapodhana{\u7717} {Cc}, yatn{\u257} tapodhana \msNd, yatnan tapodhana \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }\msM's readings here are unique but probably secondary. <SKT>t{\u7771}pti{\u7747} kuru</SKT> seems more
                attractive than <SKT>pras{\u257}dena</SKT> because it echoes <SKT>at{\u7771}pta{\u7717}</SKT> in 1.3a}

\par vai{\u347}amp{\u257}yana uv{\u257}ca| 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6 {\b vai{\u347}amp{\u257}yana uv{\u257}ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM<corr>pc</corr>{Ed}; {\i omitted in }\ \msM<corr>ac</corr>}

\par {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u r{\u257}jann avahito dharm{\u257}khy{\u257}nam anuttamam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6a {\b r{\u257}jann a{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; r{\u257}ja{\u7747}n a{\u176} \msNd, r{\u257}jan a{\u176} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6b {\b {\u176}khy{\u257}nam anuttamam] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}khy{\u257}nam uttamam {Cb},

                                               {\u176}khy{\u257}nam utamam {Cc}, {\u176}dharmavy{\u257}khy{\u257}nam uttama{\u7747} \msNd\ (<i>unmetrical</i>)}

\par vy{\u257}s{\u257}nugrahasampr{\u257}pta{\u7747} guhyadharma{\u7747} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}otu me||1.6||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6c {\b {\u176}pr{\u257}pta{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}pr{\u257}pta {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6d {\b {\u176}dharma{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}rma{\u7747} {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}otu] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}ota {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b me] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; mai {Cb}}

\par anarthayaj{\u241}akart{\u257}ra{\u7747} tapovratapar{\u257}ya{\u7751}am|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }7a {\b {\u176}kart{\u257}ra{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}karttanta{\u7747} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }7b {\b {\u176}vrata{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd{Ed}; {\u176}prata{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}ya{\u7751}am] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}yana {Cc}, {\u176}ya{\u7751}a{\u7717} {Na}, 

                                                        {\u176}yana{\u7747} {Nc}, {\u176}{\u8768}ya{\u7751}a{\u7747}{\u8768} \msNd}

\par {\u347}{\u299}la{\u347}aucasam{\u257}c{\u257}ra{\u7747} sarvabh{\u363}taday{\u257}param||1.7||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }7d {\b {\u176}param] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}nvitam {Cc}\msNd, {\u176}{\u8768}pa{\u8768}ra{\u7747} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the odd syntax here: <SKT>vi{\u7779}{\u7751}un{\u257}... dvijar{\u363}padharo bh{\u363}tv{\u257} papraccha</SKT>.
               The agent of the active verb is in the instrumental case.
                <sep/>
               On Anarthayaj{\u241}a, the interlocutor of VSS 1.9-10.2 and 19.1-21.22, and
               an important figure discussed in 22.3ff, as well as a concept (`nonmaterial sacrifice'),
               see Kiss 2022 and Introduction XXCHECK.}

\par jij{\u241}{\u257}san{\u257}rtha{\u7747} pra{\u347}naika{\u7747} vi{\u7779}{\u7751}un{\u257} prabhavi{\u7779}{\u7751}un{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }8a {\b {\u176}rtha{\u7747} pra{\u347}naika{\u7747}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}rtha{\u7747} pra{\u347}neka{\u7747} {Ca}\msNd, 

                                        {\u176}rthapra{\u347}nekam {Cc}{Ed}, {\u176}rthapra{\u347}caika{\u7747} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }8b {\b prabha{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}\msNd\msM{Ed}; prabhu{\u176} {Cc}, pr{\u257}bha{\u176} {Nc}}

\par dvijar{\u363}padharo bh{\u363}tv{\u257} papraccha vinay{\u257}nvita{\u7717}||1.8||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }8c {\b {\u176}dharo] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}¤ro {Ca}, {\u176}dhar{\u257} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }8d {\b {\u176}nvita{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}nvita{\u7747} {Cc}\msNd\msM}

\par{\b [  brahmavidy{\u257} 
 ]}
\par [vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca|]*

\par brahmavidy{\u257} katha{\u7747} j{\u241}ey{\u257} r{\u363}pavar{\u7751}avivarjit{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9a {\b j{\u241}ey{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; j{\u241}eya{\u7747} {Cb}{Cc}, j{\u241}eya \msNd, bh{\u363}yo {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9b {\b {\u176}var{\u7751}a{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM; {\u176}var{\u7751}{\u257}{\u176} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}varjit{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}varjita{\u7747} {Cc}, {\u176}varjit{\u257}{\u7717} {Nc}}

\par svaravya{\u241}jananirmuktam ak{\u7779}ara{\u7747} kimu tatparam||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9c {\b {\u176}vya{\u241}jana{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM; {\u176}vyajjana{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9cd {\b {\u176}muktam ak{\u7779}a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}mukta ak{\u7779}a{\u176} {Cb},

                                                 {\u176}mukta{\u7747} akha{\u176} \msNd, {\u176}mukta{\u7747} ak{\u7779}a{\u176} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9d {\b kimu tat param] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; kim ata{\u7717} param {Cb}{Cc},

                                                         kim atat para{\u7747} {Nb}\msNd\msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The translation of this verse, and the reconstruction and interpretation
                        of <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d, which is echoed in 1.10d, is slightly tentative.
                        I doubt if <SKT>kimu</SKT> could have the standard meaning `how much more/less'
                        here. Rather <SKT>u</SKT> is probably just an expletive.}

\par anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca| 

\par anucc{\u257}ryam asandigdham avicchinnam an{\u257}kulam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }10a {\b {\u176}cc{\u257}rya{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}c{\u257}rya{\u176} {Cc}{Nc}\msNd}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }10ab {\b {\u176}sandigdham avicchinnam an{\u257}kulam] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed};

                                {\u176}vicchinnasandigdham an{\u257}kuna {Cc}, {\u176}sandigdham anacchinnam an{\u257}kulam {Nb}}

\par nirmala{\u7747} sarvaga{\u7747} s{\u363}k{\u7779}mam ak{\u7779}ara{\u7747} kimu tatparam||1.10||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }10d {\b kimu tatparam] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; kim ata{\u7717} param {Cb}\msM,

                                                kim atatpara{\u7747} {Cc}\msNd}

\par{\b [  k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}a{\u7717} 
 ]}
\par vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca| 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11 {\b {\u176}r{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}r{\u257}gov{\u257}ca \msNd}

\par deh{\u299} dehe k{\u7779}aya{\u7747} y{\u257}te bh{\u363}jal{\u257}gni{\u347}iv{\u257}dibhi{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11a {\b dehe k{\u7779}a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Nc}; deh{\u257}t k{\u7779}a{\u176} {Cb}, dehak{\u7779}a{\u176} {Na}{Nb}\msNd\msM{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b y{\u257}te] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; y{\u257}nte \msNd}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11b {\b {\u176}gni{\u347}iv{\u257}dibhi{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}gni{\u347}iv{\u257}dibhi {Cc}, {\u176}gni{\u7747} {\u347}i*dibhi \msNd}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }11 <SKT>cf.\ K{\u363}rmapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 2.23.74: </SKT> 

                atha ka{\u347}cit pram{\u257}dena mriyate 'gnivi{\u7779}{\u257}dibhi{\u7717}| 

                tasy{\u257}{\u347}auca{\u7747} vidh{\u257}tavya{\u7747} k{\u257}rya{\u7747} caivodak{\u257}dikam||}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The word <SKT>{\u176}{\u347}iv{\u257}{\u176}</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> b is slightly suspect, and could be the result
                of metathesis, from <SKT>{\u176}vi{\u7779}{\u257}{\u176}</SKT> (`by poison'). Nevertheless, 
                jackals seems appropriate in this context, for they 
                are commonly associated with human corpses, death and the cremation ground
                (see e.g. Ohnuma 2019). 
                (Reiko Ohnuma 2019 = Ohnuma, R. The Heretical, Heterodox Howl: 
                        Jackals in P{\u257}li Buddhist Literature. Religions 2019, 10, 221.)}

\par yamad{\u363}tai{\u7717} katha{\u7747} n{\u299}to nir{\u257}lambo nira{\u241}jana{\u7717}||1.11||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11c {\b {\u176}d{\u363}tai{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}d{\u363}te {Cc}\msNd{\u8226}

                 {\b n{\u299}to] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd; n{\u299}tv{\u257} {Cc}, n{\u299}ta{\u7717} \msM, n{\u299}t{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11d {\b nira{\u241}jana{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; nira{\u241}jana {Cc}}

\par k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}ai{\u7717} katha{\u7747} baddho nirdeha{\u347} ca katha{\u7747} vrajet|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12a {\b {\u176}p{\u257}{\u347}ai{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}p{\u257}{\u347}e {Cc}, {\u176}p{\u257}{\u347}ai \msNd{\u8226}

                 {\b baddho] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; ba{\u8768}ddho{\u8768} {Cb}, baddha \msNd}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12b {\b nirdeha{\u347} ca] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM<corr>pc</corr>{Ed}; nirdaha{\u7717} sa {Cc}, nirdehasya \msNd, 

                                                        nirdehan ma \msM<corr>ac</corr>{\u8226}

                 {\b vrajet] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; bhavet {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The word <SKT>k{\u257}la</SKT> has, as usual, a double meaning in this verse: <SKT>k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}a</SKT>
                        is both Yama's noose, and also the limitation caused by time, 
                        as becomes clear at the discussion on the different time units in verses 1.11-31.}

\par svarga{\u7747} v{\u257} sa katha{\u7747} y{\u257}ti nirdeho bahudharmak{\u7771}t|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12c {\b svarga{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; svarga {Cc}\msNd\msM{\u8226}

                 {\b sa] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msNd{Ed}; sa{\u7747} {Nb}\msM{\u8226}

                 {\b y{\u257}ti] }  {Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM; y{\u257}nti {C}{Ed}}

\par etan me sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7747} br{\u363}hi j{\u241}{\u257}tum icch{\u257}mi tattvata{\u7717}||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12e {\b sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7747}] }  {C}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; sa{\u7747}{\u347}aye {Na}, sa{\u7747}{\u347}ayo {Nb}\msNd}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12f {\b {\u176}tum icch{\u257}mi] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}tum i {Cb}}

\par anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca| 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13 {\b anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca] }  {C}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\i omitted in }\ {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par atisa{\u7747}{\u347}ayaka{\u7779}{\u7789}a{\u7747} te p{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7789}o 'ha{\u7747} dvijasattama|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13a {\b atisa{\u7747}{\u347}ayaka{\u7779}{\u7789}a{\u7747} te] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM<corr>pc</corr>;

                ati{\u347}a{\u7747}sa{\u8768}ya{\u8768}ka{\u7779}{\u7789}an te {Ca}, ati{\u347}a{\u7747}sayaka{\u7779}{\u7789}am me {Cc}\msM<corr>ac</corr>{Ed}, 

                                                atisa{\u7747}{\u347}ayaka{\u7779}{\u7789}o mo \msNd}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13b {\b dvijasattama] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; ca dvijottama{\u7717} {Cc}, dvijasattama{\u7717} \msNd}

\par durvij{\u241}eya{\u7747} manu{\u7779}yais tu devad{\u257}navapannagai{\u7717}||1.13||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13c {\b {\u176}j{\u241}eya{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}j{\u241}eya {Cc}{Nb}\msNd\msM{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b manu{\u7779}yais tu] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; manu{\u7779}ai{\u347} ca {Cb}, ma{\u7751}uk{\u7779}e{\u8768}ptu{\u8768} {Cc}, 

                                                        manu{\u7779}yes tu \msNd}

\par karmahetu{\u7717} {\u347}ar{\u299}rasya utpattir nidhana{\u7747} ca yat|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14a {\b karma{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM; anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca|| karma{\u176} {Cc}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}hetu{\u7717}] }  {Cb}; {\u176}hetu {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}, {\u176}he{\u7747}tu {Cc}, {\u176}hetu \msNd{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u347}ar{\u299}rasya] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u347}ar{\u299}rasya{\u7747} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14b {\b utpattir ni{\u176}] }  \msM; utpattini{\u176} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}, utpatini{\u176} {Cc}\msNd{\u8226}

                 {\b ca yat] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; ca ya{\u7717} {Nb}, yat \msNd}

\par suk{\u7771}ta{\u7747} du{\u7779}k{\u7771}ta{\u7747} caiva p{\u257}{\u347}advayam ud{\u257}h{\u7771}tam||1.14||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14c {\b suk{\u7771}ta{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; suk{\u7771}tak{\u7771}tan {Cc}, suk{\u7771}ta \msNd{\u8226}

                 {\b caiva] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; v{\u257}pi \msNd}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14d {\b {\u176}h{\u7771}tam] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msNd\msM{Ed}; {\u176}h{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Cc}} 

\par tenaiva saha sa{\u7747}y{\u257}ti naraka{\u7747} svargam eva v{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15a {\b tenaiva] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; teneva {Cc}\msNd{\u8226}

                 {\b sa{\u7747}y{\u257}ti] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; s{\u257} y{\u257}nti {Cc}\msNd, s{\u257} y{\u257}ti \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15b {\b v{\u257}] }  {C}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; ca {Na}\msNd}

\par sukhadu{\u7717}kha{\u7747} {\u347}ar{\u299}re{\u7751}a bhoktavya{\u7747} karmasambhavam||1.15||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15c {\b sukha{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sukha{\u7747} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}du{\u7717}kha{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}\msM; {\u176}du{\u7717}kha {Cc}{Nb}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15d {\b {\u176}sambhavam] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\u176}sambhava{\u7717} {Cc}{Ed}}

\par hetun{\u257}nena viprendra deha{\u7717} sambhavate n{\u7771}{\u7751}{\u257}m|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }16a {\b {\u176}ndra] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}ndra{\u7717} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }16b {\b deha{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; dehe {Cc}, deha {Nb}\msM{\u8226}

                 {\b n{\u7771}{\u7751}{\u257}m] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; n{\u7771}{\u7751}{\u257} {Cb}{Cc}}

\par ya{\u7747} k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}am ity {\u257}hu{\u7717} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u vak{\u7779}y{\u257}mi suvrata||1.16||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }16c {\b ya{\u7747} k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}am ity {\u257}hu{\u7717}] }  {\i eme. }; ya{\u7747} k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}am ity {\u257}ha {Ca}{Cb}{Na}, 

                                        k{\u257}lap{\u257}seti satv{\u257}ha {Cc}, ya{\u7747} k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}am ity {\u257}hu {Nb}{Nc}{Ed}, 

                                        k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u7779}eti {\u8768}pastve{\u8768}ha \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }16d {\b {\u176}vrata] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}vrata{\u7717} {Cb}{Cc}}

\par na tvay{\u257} vidita{\u7747} ki{\u241}cij jij{\u241}{\u257}syasi katha{\u7747} dvija|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }17a {\b vidita{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; vidita {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }17ab {\b ki{\u241}cij ji{\u176}] }  {Cb}\msM; ki{\u241}cid vi{\u176} {Ca}<corr>pc</corr>{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}, kid vi{\u176} {Ca}<corr>ac</corr>, 

                                                        ki{\u241}ci ji{\u176} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }17b {\b katha{\u7747} dvija] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed};

                                        ¤¤¤¤¤¤¤¤¤ {\u8768}ma tvay{\u257} vidita{\u7747} ki{\u241}cid vij{\u241}{\u257}syasi{\u8768} 

                                        (<i>cancelled</i>)\ katha{\u7747} dvija {Cc}}

         {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The variant <SKT>jij{\u241}{\u257}syasi</SKT> seems to be the lectio difficilior as opposed to
                        <SKT>vij{\u241}{\u257}syasi</SKT>, but the latter could also work fine here.}

\par k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}a{\u7747} ca viprendra sakala{\u7747} vettum arhasi||1.17||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }17c {\b k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u347}a{\u7747} ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; k{\u257}lap{\u257}{\u7779}eti \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }17d {\b vettum arhasi] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}; vettum {\u363}hasi {Nc}, vaktum arhasi \msM{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note how \msM\ (agreeing with {Ed}) gives a reading that is clearly wrong.
              This confirms that while \msM\ comes up with interesting readings, 
                they are mostly to be ignored.}

\par kal{\u257}kalitak{\u257}la{\u7747} ca k{\u257}latattvakal{\u257}{\u7747} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18a {\b kal{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; k{\u257}l{\u257}{\u176} {Cc}{Na}<corr>ac</corr>{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}k{\u257}la{\u7747} ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}k{\u257}la{\u347} ca \msM{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18b {\b {\u176}kal{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}kal{\u257} {Cb}{Nc}, {\u176}vidhi{\u7747} {Na}, {\u176}kal{\u257}{\u7717} \msM}

\par tru{\u7789}idvaya{\u7747} nime{\u7779}as tu nime{\u7779}advigu{\u7751}{\u257} kal{\u257}||1.18||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18c {\b tru{\u7789}idvaya{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Nc}{Ed}; tu{\u7789}idvaya {Cb}{Nb}, tu{\u7789}idvaya{\u7747} {Na}\msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}me{\u7779}as tu] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}mevas tu {Ca}, {\u176}me{\u7779}advi{\u176} {Na}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18d {\b nime{\u7779}advi{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; nime{\u7779}{\u257}dvi{\u176} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }1.18d and 1.19a are problematic in the light of 1.19b, which 
                        redefines <SKT>kal{\u257}</SKT> in harmony with the traditional
                        interpretaion, see e.g. Artha{\u347}{\u257}stra 2.20.33: <SKT>trim{\u347}atk{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257}{\u7717} kal{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT>.
                        On divisions of time, see alse e.g. Manu 1.64ff.}

\par kal{\u257}dvigu{\u7751}it{\u257} k{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257} k{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257} vai tri{\u7747}{\u347}ati{\u7717} kal{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19a {\b {\u176}gu{\u7751}it{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}gu{\u7751}ita{\u7747} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19b {\b k{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257} vai tri{\u7747}{\u347}ati{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; vai tri{\u7747}{\u347}at{\u257} {Cb},

                                 k{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257} vai tri{\u7747}{\u347}ati {Cc}, k{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257}n vai tri{\u7747}{\u347}ati \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }I have calculated 3.2 seconds for one <SKT>k{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257}</SKT> backwards, starting from one day (see 1.20ab).}

\par tri{\u7747}{\u347}atkal{\u257} muh{\u363}rta{\u347} ca m{\u257}nu{\u7779}ena dvijottama||1.19||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19c {\b muh{\u363}rta{\u347} ca] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; muh{\u363}rtta {Cb}, muh{\u363}rta{\u241} ca {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19d {\b m{\u257}nu{\u7779}ena] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; m{\u257}nu{\u8768}{\u7779}a{\u347} ca{\u8768} {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}ttama] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}<corr>pc</corr>{Ed}; {\u176}tama{\u7717} {Nb}\msM, {\u176}ttama{\u7717} {Nc}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par muh{\u363}rtatri{\u7747}{\u347}akenaiva ahor{\u257}tra{\u7747} vidur budh{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20a {\b muh{\u363}rta{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; muh{\u363}rtt{\u257} \msM, muh{\u363}rta{\u7747} {Ed}}

\par ahor{\u257}tra{\u7747} punas tri{\u7747}{\u347}an m{\u257}sam {\u257}hur man{\u299}{\u7779}i{\u7751}a{\u7717}||1.20||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20c {\b {\u176}r{\u257}tra{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}r{\u257}tra \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20d {\b {\u176}n{\u299}{\u7779}i{\u7751}a{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}n{\u299}{\u7779}ina \msM}

\par sam{\u257} dv{\u257}da{\u347}a m{\u257}s{\u257}{\u347} ca k{\u257}latattvavido jan{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }21a {\b sam{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; m{\u257}sa {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}m{\u257}s{\u257}{\u347} ca] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}m{\u257}sa{\u347} ca {Cc}{Ed}, m{\u257}s{\u257}hu{\u7717} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }21b {\b k{\u257}la{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; kal{\u257}{\u176} {Nc}}

\par {\u347}ata{\u7747} var{\u7779}asahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i tr{\u299}{\u7751}i m{\u257}nu{\u7779}asa{\u7747}khyay{\u257}||1.21||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }21c {\b {\u347}ata{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\u347}ata{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }21b {\b m{\u257}nu{\u7779}a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; m{\u257}{\u7751}u{\u7779}ya{\u176} {Cb}{Cc}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>)}

\par {\u7779}a{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7747} caiva sahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i k{\u257}la{\u7717} kaliyuga{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22 {\b ({\u7779}a{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7747}<SKT>...</SKT> sa{\u7747}j{\u241}ita{\u7717})] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed};

                                                 {\i omitted in }\ <EYESKIP>from 21d to 24d</EYESKIP> {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22a {\b {\u7779}a{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7747} caiva] }  {C}{Nc}\msM; {\u7779}a{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7747} var{\u7779}a{\u176} {Na}, {\i omitted in }\ {Nb}, {\u7779}a{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u347} caiva {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22b {\b {\u176}yuga{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; {\i omitted in }\ {Nb}, {\u176}yuga \msM{Ed}}

\par dvigu{\u7751}a{\u7717} kalisa{\u7747}khy{\u257}to dv{\u257}paro yuga sa{\u7747}j{\u241}ita{\u7717}||1.22||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22c {\b dvigu{\u7751}a{\u7717} kalisa{\u7747}khy{\u257}to] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; {\i omitted in }\ {Nb},

                                        kalisa{\u7747}khy{\u257}s tu dvigu{\u7751}o \msM, dvigu{\u7751}{\u257} kalisa{\u7747}khy{\u257}to {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22d {\b dv{\u257}paro yuga sa{\u7747}j{\u241}ita{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; {\i omitted in }\ {Nb},

                        dv{\u257}para{\u7717} yuga{\u7717} sa{\u7747}j{\u241}ikam \msM, dv{\u257}pare yuga sa{\u7747}j{\u241}ita{\u7717} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the stem form noun <SKT>yuga</SKT> metri causa.}

\par tret{\u257} tu trigu{\u7751}{\u257} j{\u241}ey{\u257} catu{\u7717} k{\u7771}tayuga{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }23 {\b (tret{\u257}<SKT>...</SKT> ekasaptati{\u7717})] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed};

                                         {\i omitted in }\ <EYESKIP>from 21d to 24d</EYESKIP> {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }23a {\b tret{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; tetr{\u257} {Cc}\msM, {\i omitted in }\ {Nb}, tretr{\u257} {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b trigu{\u7751}{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; t{\u7771}gu{\u7751}o \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b j{\u241}ey{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; j{\u241}eya{\u7717} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }23b {\b {\u176}yuga{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM; {\i omitted in }\ {Nb}, {\u176}yuga {Ed}}

\par e{\u7779}{\u257} caturyug{\u257}sa{\u7747}khy{\u257} k{\u7771}tv{\u257} vai hy ekasaptati{\u7717}||1.23||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }23d {\b hy e{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; he{\u176} {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}saptati{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}saptati \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The element <SKT>{\u176}yug{\u257}{\u176}</SKT> seems to stand for {\u176}yuga{\u176} metri causa.
                If <SKT>{\u176}yug{\u257}</SKT> and <SKT>sa{\u7747}khy{\u257}</SKT> are to be separated, <SKT>e{\u7779}{\u257}</SKT> becomes 
                problematic to interpret.}

\par manvantarasya caikasya j{\u241}{\u257}nam ukta{\u7747} sam{\u257}sata{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24 {\b (manvantarasya<SKT>...</SKT> sa{\u7747}khyay{\u257})] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\i omitted in } 

                                        <EYESKIP>from 21d to 24d</EYESKIP> {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24a {\b caikasya] }  {C}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc}\msM<corr>pc</corr>{Ed}; {\i omitted in }\ {Na}<corr>ac</corr>{Nb}\msM<corr>ac</corr>}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24b {\b {\u176}kta{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}kta \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }See 21.34ff.}

\par kalpo manvantar{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} tu caturda{\u347}a tu sa{\u7747}khyay{\u257}||1.24||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24c {\b kalpo] }  {Cb}; kalpa {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}, {\i omitted in }\ {Nb}{\u8226}

                 {\b manvanta{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; nvanta{\u176} \msM<corr>ac</corr>, ma{\u7747}nvanta{\u176} \msM<corr>pc</corr>}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24d {\b {\u176}da{\u347}a] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}da{\u347}a{\u7747} {Cb}, {\i omitted in }\ {Nb}{\u8226}

                 {\b sa{\u7747}khyay{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u347}a{\u7747}k{\u7779}ay{\u257} \msM}

\par da{\u347}a kalpasahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i brahm{\u257}ha{\u7717} parikalpitam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }25b {\b {\u176}{\u257}ha{\u7717}] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}{\u257}ha {Ca}{\u8226}

                 {\b parikalpitam] }  {Ca}{Nc}; karikalpitam {Cb}, parikalpita{\u7717} {Cc}{Nb}\msM{Ed}, parik{\u299}rtit{\u257}{\u7717} {Na}}

\par r{\u257}trir et{\u257}vat{\u299} prokt{\u257} munibhis tattvadar{\u347}ibhi{\u7717}||1.25||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }25d {\b {\u176}dar{\u347}ibhi{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}dar{\u347}ibhi \msM}

\par r{\u257}try{\u257}game pral{\u299}yante jagat sarva{\u7747} car{\u257}caram|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }26a {\b pral{\u299}yante] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; pral{\u299}yate {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }26b {\b sarva{\u7747} ca{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sarva{\u347} ca{\u176} \msM}

\par ah{\u257}game tathaiveha utpadyante car{\u257}caram||1.26||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }26c {\b ah{\u257}game] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; ah{\u257}ga× {Nb}, ahar{\u257}game \msM\ (<i>unmetrical</i>), ahn{\u257}game {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }26d {\b {\u176}padyante] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}padya{\u7747}ti \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The plural form <SKT>pral{\u299}yante</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> a is metri causa for <SKT>pral{\u299}yate</SKT>,
                perhaps also influencing <SKT>utpadyante</SKT> (for <SKT>utpadyate</SKT>) in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d,
                which in turn is used here to avoid an iambic pattern (- - . - . - . -).}

\par par{\u257}rdhaparakalp{\u257}ni at{\u299}t{\u257}ni dvijottama|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27a {\b {\u176}rdha{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}rdha{\u7747} {Nb}}

\par an{\u257}gata{\u7747} tathaiv{\u257}hur bh{\u7771}gur{\u257}dimahar{\u7779}aya{\u7717}||1.27||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27cd {\b {\u176}v{\u257}hur bh{\u7771}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}v{\u257}hu bh{\u7771}{\u176} {Cc}{Nb}\msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27d {\b mahar{\u7779}aya{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Ed}; mahaya{\u7717} {Na}<corr>ac</corr>, marha{\u7779}aya{\u7717} {Nc}, 

                                                                mahar{\u7779}ibhi{\u7717} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the peculiar compound <SKT>bh{\u7771}gu-r-{\u257}di-mahar{\u7779}aya{\u7717}</SKT>.}

\par yath{\u257}rkagrahat{\u257}rendu bhramato d{\u7771}{\u347}yate tv iha|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28a {\b {\u176}{\u257}rka{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM<corr>pc</corr>{Ed}; {\u176}{\u257}rk{\u257}{\u176} \msM<corr>ac</corr>{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}t{\u257}rendu] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}t{\u257}raindu \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28b {\b d{\u7771}{\u347}yate tv iha] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; d{\u7771}{\u347}yandiha {Cb}, d{\u7771}syate tv iha{\u7717} {Cc},

                                                                d{\u7771}{\u347}yate tv iha{\u7717} \msM}

\par k{\u257}lacakra{\u7747} bhramatvaiva vi{\u347}rama{\u7747} na ca vidmahe||1.28||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28c {\b {\u176}tvaiva] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}tveva {Cb}{Nb}\msM, {\u176}tveha {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28d {\b {\u176}{\u347}rama{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}{\u347}ramo {Na}<corr>ac</corr>, {\u176}{\u347}r{\u257}man {Nb}, {\u176}{\u347}r{\u257}mo \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b vidmahe] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; vigrahe {Cb}, vidyate \msM}

\par k{\u257}la{\u7717} s{\u7771}jati bh{\u363}t{\u257}ni k{\u257}la{\u7717} sa{\u7747}harate puna{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }29b {\b k{\u257}la{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; k{\u257}la {Ed}}

\par k{\u257}lasya va{\u347}ag{\u257}{\u7717} sarve na k{\u257}lava{\u347}ak{\u7771}t kvacit||1.29||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }29c {\b k{\u257}lasya] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM<corr>pc</corr>{Ed}; k{\u257}la{\u7717}sya \msM<corr>ac</corr>{\u8226}

                 {\b va{\u347}ag{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; va{\u347}ag{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }29d {\b k{\u257}lava{\u347}ak{\u7771}{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; k{\u257}lo va{\u347}ak{\u7771}{\u176} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }29 ≈\ <SKT>K{\u363}rmapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.11.32: </SKT> 

                k{\u257}la{\u7717} s{\u7771}jati bh{\u363}t{\u257}ni k{\u257}la{\u7717} sa{\u7747}harate praj{\u257}{\u7717} |

                sarve k{\u257}lasya va{\u347}ag{\u257} na k{\u257}la{\u7717} kasyacid va{\u347}e ||}

\par caturda{\u347}apar{\u257}rdh{\u257}ni devar{\u257}j{\u257} dvijottama|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }30b {\b devar{\u257}j{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; devar{\u257}ja \msM{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}ttama] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}ttama{\u7717} \msM}

\par k{\u257}lena samat{\u299}t{\u257}ni k{\u257}lo hi duratikrama{\u7717}||1.30||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }30d <SKT> = MBh 12.220.41d = Garu{\u7693}apur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.108.7 </SKT>}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note that <SKT>samat{\u299}t{\u257}ni</SKT> (neuter) most probably picks up <SKT>devar{\u257}j{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT>
                (masculine) in this verse, or rather <SKT>devar{\u257}j{\u257}</SKT> stands for
                <SKT>devar{\u257}j{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}</SKT> and <SKT>samat{\u299}t{\u257}ni</SKT> picks up <SKT>{\u176}par{\u257}rdh{\u257}ni</SKT>.}

\par e{\u7779}a k{\u257}lo mah{\u257}yog{\u299} brahm{\u257} vi{\u7779}{\u7751}u{\u7717} para{\u7717} {\u347}iva{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }31a {\b k{\u257}lo] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}; k{\u257}la {Cc}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }31b {\b brahm{\u257} vi{\u7779}{\u7751}u{\u7717} para{\u7717}] }  {Cb}; brahmavi{\u7779}{\u7751}upara{\u7717} {Ca}{Nc}\msM, brahm{\u257} vi{\u7779}{\u7751}u para{\u7717} {Cc}{Na}{Nb},

                                                        brahmavi{\u7779}{\u7751}upara {Ed}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>)}

\par an{\u257}dinidhano dh{\u257}t{\u257} sa mah{\u257}tm{\u257} namaskuru||1.31||

\par{\b [  par{\u257}rdh{\u257}di 
 ]}
\par vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca| 

\par {\u347}ruta{\u7747} vai k{\u257}lacakra{\u7747} tu mukhapadmavini{\u7717}s{\u7771}tam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32a {\b {\u347}ruta{\u7747} vai] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u347}ruto va{\u7717} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}cakra{\u7747} tu] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}cakrasya {Cc}, {\u176}cakrat tu \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32b {\b vini{\u7717}s{\u7771}tam] }  {\i corr. }; vinis{\u7771}tam {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>)}

\par par{\u257}rdha{\u7747} ca para{\u7747} caiva {\u347}rotu{\u7747} va{\u7717} pratid{\u299}pitam||1.32||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32c {\b par{\u257}rdha{\u7747} ca] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u8768}pa{\u8768}r{\u257}rddha{\u7747} ca {Ca},

                                par{\u257}dha{\u241} ca \msM<corr>ac</corr>, par{\u257}rdha{\u7747}{\u241} ce \msM<corr>pc</corr>{\u8226}

                 {\b para{\u7747} caiva] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; par{\u257}{\u241} caiva \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32d {\b va{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM<corr>ac</corr>; na{\u7717} \msM<corr>pc</corr>, ya{\u7717} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}d{\u299}pitam] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}d{\u299}yat{\u257}{\u7747} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The reading of all manuscripts consulted, <SKT>vinis{\u7771}tam</SKT>, 
                may be considered metrical if we interpret it, loosely, as <SKT>vinisritam</SKT>.
        <sep/>
		<SKT>P{\u257}da</SKT> d is suspicious and my translation is tentative.
		\msM s reading in p{\u257}da d (£srotu{\u7747} na{\u7717} pratid{\u299}yat{\u257}{\u7747}</SKT>) might make sense 
		("give it back/repeat it for us again"), but it sounds forced,
		as if the scribe tried to come up with a reading that he understood
		better than £srotu{\u7747} va{\u7717} pratid{\u299}pitam</SKT>, which is in fact not easy to interpret.}

\par anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca| 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33 {\b anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca] }  {C}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\i omitted in }\ {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par eka{\u7747} da{\u347}a{\u7747} {\u347}ata{\u7747} caiva sahasram ayuta{\u7747} tath{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33b {\b sahasra{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; s{\u257}hasra{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}yuta{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}tan {Nb}}

\par prayuta{\u7747} niyuta{\u7747} ko{\u7789}im arbuda{\u7747} v{\u7771}ndam eva ca||1.33||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33cd {\b ko{\u7789}im a{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; ko{\u7789}ir a{\u176} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33d {\b {\u176}rbuda{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}buda{\u7747} {Nc}}

\par kharva{\u7747} caiva nikharva{\u7747} ca {\u347}a{\u7749}ku{\u7717} padma{\u7747} tathaiva ca|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34a {\b nikharva{\u7747} ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; nikharva{\u7747} tu {Nb}, nisarva{\u241} ca \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34b {\b {\u347}a{\u7749}ku{\u7717}] }  {\i corr. }; {\u347}a{\u7749}ku {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM, {\u347}a{\u7747}kha {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b padma{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; padma \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }34 <SKT> = Brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}apur{\u257}{\u7751}a 3.2.101 </SKT> }

\par samudro madhyam anta{\u7747} ca par{\u257}rdha{\u7747} ca para{\u7747} tath{\u257}||1.34||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34cd {\b (samudro<SKT>...</SKT> tath{\u257})] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\i omitted in }\ {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34c {\b samudro] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; samudra{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b madhyam anta{\u7747} ca] }  {C}{Na}<corr>ac</corr>\msM; madhyam{\u257}nta{\u7747} ca {Na}<corr>pc</corr>, 

                        madhya{\u8768}manta{\u241} ca{\u8768} {Nb}, madhyam anta{\u347} ca {Nc}, {\i omitted in }\ {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34d {\b par{\u257}rdha{\u7747} ca para{\u7747} tath{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; par{\u257}rddhaparadvegu{\u7751}{\u257}m \msM}

		 {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }For <SKT>anta</SKT> meaning <SKT>ananta</SKT>, see 1.58cd-59ab. \msM's reading in p{\u257}da d
	               may be a result of an eyeskip to 1.35c.}

\par sarve da{\u347}agu{\u7751}{\u257} j{\u241}ey{\u257}{\u7717} par{\u257}rdha{\u7747} y{\u257}vad eva hi|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35 {\b (sarve<SKT>...</SKT> vidh{\u299}yate)] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\i omitted in }\ {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35b {\b par{\u257}rdha{\u7747}] }  {Nc}; par{\u257}rdha {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}\msM, par{\u257}{\u8768}rdha{\u8768} {Ca}, {\i omitted in }\ {Ed}}

\par par{\u257}rdhadvigu{\u7751}enaiva parasa{\u7747}khy{\u257} vidh{\u299}yate||1.35||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35c {\b par{\u257}rdha{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; par{\u257}rdha{\u7747} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35d {\b {\u176}sa{\u7747}khy{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}sakhy{\u257} \msM}

\par par{\u257}t paratara{\u7747} n{\u257}sti iti me ni{\u347}cit{\u257} mati{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }36ab {\b par{\u257}t paratara{\u7747} n{\u257}sti iti me ni{\u347}cit{\u257} mati{\u7717}] }  {C}{Nb}{Nc}<corr>pc</corr>;

                par{\u257}t paratara{\u7747} n{\u257}sti iti me ni{\u347}cit{\u257} mati {Na}{Nc}<corr>ac</corr>,

                par{\u257}parataran n{\u257}sti iti me ni{\u347}cit{\u257} mati \msM,

                v{\u7771}nda{\u241} caiva mah{\u257}v{\u7771}nda dvipar{\u257}nantam eva ca|

                par{\u257}t paratara{\u7747} n{\u257}sti iti me ni{\u347}cit{\u257} mati{\u7717}|| {Ed}}

\par pur{\u257}{\u7751}avedapa{\u7789}hit{\u257} may{\u257}khy{\u257}t{\u257} dvijottama||1.36||

{\footnote {\chftn ) }36e {\b {\u176}veda{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Ed}; {\u176}vede {Cb}{Cc}{Nb}{Nc}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>),

	                                 {\u176}ved{\u257} {Na}, {\u176}vedai{\u7717} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }36f {\b {\u176}{\u257}khy{\u257}t{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}; {\u176}{\u257}khy{\u257}ta{\u7747} {Cc}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}ttama] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}tama \msM}

\par{\b [  brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}am 
 ]}
\par vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca| 

\par brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7747} kati vij{\u241}eya{\u7747} pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} pr{\u257}pita{\u7747} kvacit|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }37a {\b brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}a {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }37b {\b pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} pr{\u257}pita{\u7747} kvacit] }  {\i conj. }; pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u241} c{\u257}pita{\u7747}  kvacit {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed},

                                                pram{\u257}{\u241} c{\u257}pitat kvacit {Nc}, pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u241} c{\u257}pit{\u257}{\u7747} kati \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The word <SKT>pr{\u257}pita{\u7747}</SKT> is a conjecture for <SKT>c{\u257}pita{\u7747}</SKT>, which I find unintelligible. 
                Another possibility could be <SKT>j{\u241}{\u257}pita{\u7747}</SKT>.}

\par kati c{\u257}{\u7749}gulim{\u363}rdhe{\u7779}u s{\u363}ryas tapati vai mah{\u299}m||1.37||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }37d {\b s{\u363}ryas ta{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; ryo \msM<corr>ac</corr>, {\u347}{\u363}ryo \msM<corr>pc</corr>{\u8226}

                 {\b mah{\u299}m] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}\msM; mah{\u299}{\u8768}m{\u8768} {Ca}, mah{\u299} {Nb}{Nc}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The purport of <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s c and d is slightly obscure to me.}

\par anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca| 

\par brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} prasa{\u7747}khy{\u257}tu{\u7747} may{\u257} {\u347}akya{\u7747} katha{\u7747} dvija|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38a {\b brahm{\u257}{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; brahma{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b prasa{\u7747}khy{\u257}tu{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM; prasa{\u7747}s{\u257} tu {Nb}, ca sa{\u7747}khy{\u257}tu{\u7747} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38b {\b {\u347}akya{\u7747} ka{\u176}] }  {Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u347}aky{\u257} ka{\u176} {C}{Nc}, saky{\u257}{\u7749} ka{\u176} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }One would expect <SKT>brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}ni</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> a instead of <SKT>brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}</SKT>,
                but we should probably understand <SKT>brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} vi{\u347}e{\u7779}{\u257}n prasa{\u7747}khy{\u257}tu{\u7747}...</SKT>}

\par dev{\u257}s te 'pi na j{\u257}nanti m{\u257}nu{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} ca k{\u257} kath{\u257}||1.38||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38c {\b dev{\u257}s te] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; devat{\u257}pi \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38d {\b m{\u257}nu{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; m{\u257}nu{\u7779}{\u257}rna{\u241} ca \msM<corr>ac</corr>, m{\u257}nu{\u7779}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u241} ca \msM<corr>pc</corr>}

\par pary{\u257}ye{\u7751}a tu vak{\u7779}y{\u257}mi yath{\u257}{\u347}akya{\u7747} dvijottama|

\par brahma{\u7751}{\u257} yat pur{\u257}khy{\u257}to m{\u257}tari{\u347}v{\u257} yath{\u257} tath{\u257}||1.39||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }39c {\b pur{\u257}khy{\u257}to] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; pur{\u257}khy{\u257}ta{\u7747} \msM, mam{\u257}khy{\u257}to {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }39 <SKT>cf. Brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}apur{\u257}{\u7751}a 3.4.58cd: </SKT> 

                        brahm{\u257} dadau {\u347}{\u257}stram ida{\u7747} pur{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} m{\u257}tari{\u347}vane} 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note that in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d <SKT>m{\u257}tari{\u347}van</SKT> stands for the accusative <SKT>m{\u257}tari{\u347}v{\u257}na{\u7747}</SKT> or
                        the dative <SKT>m{\u257}tari{\u347}vane</SKT> or the genitive <SKT>m{\u257}tari{\u347}vana{\u7717}</SKT>.
                        The claim that Brahm{\u257} taught M{\u257}tari{\u347}van is confirmed in 1.64cd,
                        again using the nominative for the accusative, dative or genitive, and
                        also e.g. in Brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}apur{\u257}{\u7751}a 3.4.58cd (see the apparatus).}

\par {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}bhyantare{\u7751}aiva sarve{\u7779}{\u257}m iva bh{\u363}bh{\u7771}t{\u257}m|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }40a {\b {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u176} \msM<corr>ac</corr>, {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}e{\u176} \msM<corr>pc</corr>}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }40b {\b sarve{\u7779}{\u257}m iva bh{\u363}bh{\u7771}t{\u257}m] }  {\i conj. }; sarve{\u7779}{\u257}m iva bh{\u363}rit{\u257}{\u7717} {Ca}{Cb}{Nc},

	                                sarve{\u7779}{\u257}m eva bh{\u363}rit{\u257}{\u7717} {Cc},

					sarve{\u7779}{\u257}m iva bh{\u363}rit{\u257} {Na}, sarve{\u7779}{\u257}m eva bh{\u363}ri{\u7751}{\u257}m {Nb},

					sa{\u8768}r{\u7779}ap{\u257}{\u8768} iva bh{\u257}vit{\u257} \msM,

					sarve{\u7779}{\u257}m eva bh{\u363}r im{\u257}{\u7747} {Ed}}

\par da{\u347}an{\u257}ma di{\u347}{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}e k{\u299}rtita{\u7747} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u||1.40||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }40c {\b di{\u347}{\u257}{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u176} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }40d {\b brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}e] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; brahma{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257} \msM{\u8226}

		 {\b k{\u299}rtita{\u7747} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; 

					ya ca k{\u299}rtitam {Cb}, k{\u299}rttit{\u257} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u \msM}

			{\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }My conjecture in p{\u257}da b is based on the fact that the 
			reading transmitted in the MSS seem unintelligible and more importantly that
			these names are said to belong to £n{\u257}yaka</SKT>s in the subsequent verses,
			a possible synonym of £bh{\u363}bh{\u7771}t</SKT>, ('a king'), and also that
			it is a minute intervention.
				In <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> c, understand <SKT>di{\u347}{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}</SKT> as <SKT>di{\u347}{\u257}m a{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}</SKT> 
				or <SKT>diga{\u7779}{\u7789}ak{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}</SKT>}

\par{\b [  bh{\u363}bh{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7747} n{\u257}m{\u257}ni 
 ]}
\par sah{\u257}saha{\u7717} saha{\u7717} sahyo visaha{\u7717} sa{\u7747}hato 'sah{\u257}|

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }41a {\b sah{\u257}saha{\u7717}] }  {Nc}; s{\u257}h{\u257}saha {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}{\u8226}

		 {\b saha{\u7717} sahyo] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc};

		      saha{\u7717} saj{\u241}{\u257} {Cb}, saho sahya{\u7717} \msM, saha{\u7717} saj{\u241}o {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }41b {\b visaha{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; visaha {Cc}\msM{\u8226}

                 {\b sah{\u257}] }  \msM; sabh{\u257} {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}, sabh{\u257}{\u7717} {Cb}, sat{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }I chose to supply an <SKT>avagraha</SKT> before <SKT>sah{\u257}</SKT> only because all the sources 
                consulted read <SKT>sa{\u7747}hato</SKT> as the previous word, making the <SKT>sandhi</SKT>
                <SKT>o-s</SKT> suspicious. 
                Note that many of the names here and in the following verses are,
                in the absence of any parallel passage, rather insecure.
                What is clear here is that the names evoke the name Sahasr{\u257}k{\u7779}a,
                one of the appellations of
                Indra, the guadrian of the eastern direction.}

\par prasaho 'prasaha{\u7717} s{\u257}nu{\u7717} p{\u363}rvato da{\u347}a n{\u257}yak{\u257}{\u7717}||1.41||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }41c {\b prasaho] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; prasahe{\u7717} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b prasaha{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; prasa{\u8768}va{\u7717}{\u8768} {Cc}, sapraha{\u7717} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b s{\u257}nu{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}; s{\u257}nu {Nc}\msM{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }41d {\b p{\u363}rvato] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; parvato {Ed}}

\par prabh{\u257}so bh{\u257}sano bh{\u257}nu{\u7717} pradyoto dyutimo dyuti{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }42a {\b bh{\u257}sano] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; bh{\u257}sa× {Cc}, bh{\u257}sato {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b bh{\u257}nu{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; bh{\u257}nu {Cb}\msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }42b {\b dyutimo] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM; dyutino {Nc}{Ed}}

\par d{\u299}ptatej{\u257}{\u347} ca tej{\u257}{\u347} ca tej{\u257} tejavaho da{\u347}a||1.42||

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }42c {\b d{\u299}ptatej{\u257}{\u347} ca tej{\u257}{\u347} ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; d{\u299}ptatej{\u257}{\u347} ca teja{\u347} ca {Cb}, 

                                 d{\u299}ptatejas teja{\u347} ca \msM\ (<i>unmetrical</i>), d{\u299}ptateja{\u347} ca tej{\u257}{\u347} ca {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }42d {\b tej{\u257} tejavaho] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; tejatejayaha \msM}

\par {\u257}gneye tv etad {\u257}khy{\u257}ta{\u7747} y{\u257}mye {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}v atha bho dvija|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }43a {\b {\u257}gneye] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u257}gneya {Nc}, {\u257}gnerye \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b tv etad {\u257}{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; tv ecam {\u257} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }43b {\b {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}v atha] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}utha \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b dvija] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; dvija{\u7717} {Nb}}

\par yamo 'tha yamun{\u257} y{\u257}ma{\u7717} sa{\u7747}yamo yamuno 'yama{\u7717}||1.43||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }43d {\b sa{\u7747}yamo] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sa{\u7747}yama \msM{\u8226}

		 {\b yamuno] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}; yamano {Cc}{Nc}, yumun{\u257} {Na},

				yamato \msM, yamun{\u257}{\u176} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b yama{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; yana \msM}

\par sa{\u7747}yano yamanoy{\u257}no yaniyugm{\u257} yanoyana{\u7717}|

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }44a {\b sa{\u7747}yano yamanoy{\u257}no] }  {Na}; sa{\u7747}yamo yamanoy{\u257}no {Ca}{Cc}{Ed}, 

				sa{\u7747}yamo yamunoy{\u257}no {Cb}{Nb},

                                         sa{\u7747}yam{\u257} yamano y{\u257}mo {Nc}, yamiyugm{\u257} yano y{\u257}na{\u7717} \msM}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }44b {\b yaniyugm{\u257} yano yana{\u7717}] }  {Nb}; yaniyugm{\u257} nayo yana{\u7717} {Ca}{Cc}{Na},

				 yaniyugm{\u257} nayo naya{\u7717} {Cb},

	yaniyugm{\u257} nayo yama{\u7717} {Nc}, da{\u347}am{\u257} y{\u257}myam {\u257}{\u347}{\u7771}t{\u257} \msM, yaniyugm{\u257} nayonaya {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }I have choosen the variant <SKT>sa{\u7747}yano</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> c only to avoid the repetition of
                        the name <SKT>sa{\u7747}yama</SKT>, and the variant <SKT>yanoyana{\u7717}</SKT> because I suspect that
                        most of the names here should begin with <SKT>ya</SKT>. All the name forms
                        in this verse are to be taken as tentative. The only 
                        guiding light is the presence of <SKT>ya</SKT>, reinforcing a connection with Yama.}

\par nagajo nagan{\u257} nando nagaro naga nandana{\u7717}||1.44||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }44c {\b nagan{\u257} nando] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM;

                                nagaj{\u257} nando {Cb}, nagan{\u257}gendra \msM, nagano nado {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }44d {\b nagaro naganandana{\u7717}] }  {Nb}\msM<corr>ac</corr>; nagaroraganandana{\u7717} {Ca}{Nc},

		   nagaro{\u8768}nagananda{\u8768}na{\u7717} {Cb},

		   naga{\u8768}ro{\u8768}××nandana{\u7717} {Cc},

		   nagarogaranandana{\u7717} {Na}, nagaro nananandana{\u7717} \msM<corr>pc</corr>, nagaronnaganandana{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par nagarbho gahano guhyo g{\u363}{\u7693}hajo da{\u347}a tatpara{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }45a {\b nagarbho] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; n{\u7771}gabho {Nb}, nagarbha \msM{\u8226} 

                 {\b gahano guhyo] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; guhano guhya \msM, gahano guhye {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }45b {\b g{\u363}{\u7693}hajo] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; gu{\u7693}ajo \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b tatpara{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; tatparam \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note that the reconstruction of these names are tentative. What is clear here is that the
		initials should be <SKT>na</SKT> and <SKT>ga</SKT>, probably suggesting a connection with
				£nir{\u7771}ti</SKT>, £naraka</SKT> and <SKT>n{\u257}ga</SKT>s.}

\par v{\u257}ru{\u7751}ena pravak{\u7779}y{\u257}mi {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u vipra nibodha me||1.45||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }45c {\b v{\u257}ru{\u7751}ena] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; v{\u257}ru{\u7751}e ca {Ed}}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }45d {\b {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u] }  {Nb}\msM; {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7749}ge {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc},

				{\u347}{\u7771}{\u8768}{\u7749}ge{\u8768} {Cc}, m{\u7771}ddhe {Ed}}

\par babhra{\u7717} setur bhavodbhadra{\u7717} prabhavodbhavabh{\u257}jana{\u7717}|

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }46a {\b babhra{\u7717} setur bha{\u176}] }  {\i corr. }; babhra{\u7747} setur bha{\u176} {Ca}{Cb},

					babhra{\u7747} setu bha{\u176} {Cc},

                      babhra{\u7717} setu bha{\u176} {Na}, babhra{\u7747} sotur bha{\u176} {Nb}, babhra setur bha{\u176} {Nc},

                                    babhr{\u363} setu bha{\u176} \msM, babhr{\u363}n satur bha{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }46b {\b prabhavodbhava{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; prabhavobhava{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}bh{\u257}jana{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\u176}bh{\u257}jana {Ed}}

\par bhara{\u7751}o bhuvano bhart{\u257} da{\u347}aite varu{\u7751}{\u257}lay{\u257}{\u7717}||1.46||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }46c {\b bhara{\u7751}o] }  {Cb}{Nc}; bhara{\u7751}a {Ca}{Na}, bhara{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} {Cc}{Ed},

                                        bhara{\u7751}{\u257} {Nb}, bhara{\u7751}a{\u7717} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }46d {\b da{\u347}aite] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; da{\u347}ete {Nc}, da{\u347}ait{\u257} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}{\u257}lay{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}{\u257}lay{\u257} \msM{Ed}}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Varu{\u7751}a upholds the sky and the earth. That could be the reason why 
		these names unclude £bhara{\u7751}a</SKT> and £bhart{\u7771}</SKT>.}

\par n{\u7771}garbho 'suragarbha{\u347} ca devagarbho mah{\u299}dhara{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }47a {\b n{\u7771}garbho] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; n{\u7771}gabh{\u257} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}garbha{\u347} ca] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}garbh{\u257}{\u347} ca {Cc}{Na}\msM{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }47b {\b devagarbho] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; devagarbha \msM}

\par v{\u7771}{\u7779}abho v{\u7771}{\u7779}agarbha{\u347} ca v{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7749}ko v{\u7771}{\u7779}abhadhvaja{\u7717}||1.47||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }47c {\b {\u176}garbha{\u347} ca] }  {C}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}garbh{\u257}{\u347} ca {Na}, {\u176}garbho{\u347} ca \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }47d {\b v{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7749}ko] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; v{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7747}go \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b v{\u7771}{\u7779}abha{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; v{\u7771}{\u7779}a¤{\u176} {Cc}}

\par j{\u241}{\u257}tavya{\u347} ca tath{\u257} samyag v{\u7771}{\u7779}ajo v{\u7771}{\u7779}anandana{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }48a {\b j{\u241}{\u257}tavya{\u347} ca tath{\u257} samyag] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; v{\u7771}{\u7779}a{\u241}jav{\u7771}{\u7779}ananda{\u347} ca \msM,

                                                        j{\u241}{\u257}nav{\u257}{\u241} ca tath{\u257} satya{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }48b {\b v{\u7771}{\u7779}ajo v{\u7771}{\u7779}anandana{\u7717}] }  {C}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; v{\u7771}{\u7779}anandana{\u7717} {Na},

                                da{\u347}an{\u257}yaka v{\u257}yave \msM}

\par n{\u257}yak{\u257} da{\u347}a v{\u257}yavye k{\u299}rtit{\u257} ye may{\u257} dvija||1.48||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }48cd {\b n{\u257}yak{\u257} da{\u347}a v{\u257}yavye k{\u299}rtit{\u257} ye may{\u257} dvija] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed};

                       n{\u257}yak{\u257} da{\u347}a v{\u257}yavye k{\u299}rtit{\u257} ye may{\u257} dvija {Cc}{Nb},

                       n{\u257}yak{\u257} da{\u347}a v{\u257}yavye k{\u299}rtit{\u257} ya may{\u257} dvija {Nc},

                       k{\u299}rtito ya{\u7747} may{\u257} dvipra yath{\u257} tathyena suvrata{\u7717} \msM}

\par sulabha{\u7717} sumana{\u7717} saumya{\u7717} supraja{\u7717} sutanu{\u7717} {\u347}iva{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }49a {\b sulabha{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; surabha{\u7717} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b sumana{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; suman{\u257}{\u7717} {Nc}, sumano \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b saumya{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; somya \msM}

\par sata satya laya{\u7717} {\u347}ambhur da{\u347}an{\u257}yakam uttare||1.49||

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }49c {\b sata satya] }  {C}{Nc}; satyasatya {Na}, suta satya {Nb},

				suta{\u7717} satya \msM, sata saty{\u257}{\u176} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b laya{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; laya{\u7747} {Nc}}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }49cd {\b {\u347}ambhur da{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u347}ambhu da{\u176} {Cc}{Na}{Nc},

		 		{\u347}am{\u8768}bhu{\u7747}{\u8768} da{\u176} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }49d {\b {\u176}n{\u257}yakam u{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\u176}n{\u257}yaka u{\u176} {Ed}}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note how £da{\u347}an{\u257}yakam</SKT> is a singular collective noun in p{\u257}da d.}

\par indu bindu bhuvo vajra varado vara var{\u7779}a{\u7751}a{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }50a {\b vajra] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; vraja{\u7717} \msM}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) }50b {\b {\u176}var{\u7779}a{\u7751}a{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM; 

			{\u176}¤{\u8768}r{\u347}a{\u7751}am{\u8768} {Nc}, {\u176}daryya ca {Ed}}

\par ilano valino brahm{\u257} da{\u347}e{\u347}{\u257}ne{\u7779}u n{\u257}yak{\u257}{\u7717}||1.50||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }50c {\b ilano valino brahm{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; ilino valino brahma{\u7717} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }50d {\b da{\u347}e{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; da{\u347}ai{\u176} {Cb}{Cc}{Nb}, di{\u347}ai{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b n{\u257}yak{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; n{\u257}yak{\u257} \msM}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The North-East seems to be occupied by Brahm{\u257}, and by kings whose names should
				somehow evoke Brahm{\u257}'s name.}

\par aparo vimalo moho nirmalo mana mohana{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }51a {\b aparo vimalo moho] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; apara{\u7717} vimal{\u257} moh{\u257} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }51b {\b nirmalo ma{\u176}] }  {\i eme. }; nimalo ma{\u176} {Ca}, nirmalonma{\u176} {Cb}{Nc},

                                                nirmalotma{\u176} {Cc}{Ed}, nimalorma{\u176} {Na}{Nb}, nirmalonma{\u176} \msM}

\par ak{\u7779}aya{\u347} c{\u257}vyayo vi{\u7779}{\u7751}ur varado madhyame da{\u347}a||1.51||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }51c {\b ak{\u7779}aya{\u347} c{\u257}vyayo] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; ak{\u7779}ay{\u257}{\u347} c{\u257}vyayo {Cc},

                                ak{\u7779}aya{\u347} c{\u257}vyaya{\u7747} \msM, ak{\u7779}aya{\u241} c{\u257}vyayo {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }51cd {\b vi{\u7779}{\u7751}ur va{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nc}{Ed}; vi{\u7779}{\u7751}u va{\u176} {Cc}{Na}\msM, rvi{\u7779}{\u7751}ur va {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }51d {\b madhyame da{\u347}a] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nc}; madhyamo da{\u347}a {Cc}{Na}, 

                                        varavar{\u7779}a{\u7751}a{\u7717} {Nb}, madhyamo da{\u347}a{\u7717} \msM, madhyame da{\u347}a{\u7717} {Ed}}

	{\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note how the center of the universe seems to be occupied by Vi{\u7779}{\u7751}u and
			notice that the last three lists above have been associated 
			with Śiva, Brahm{\u257} and Vi{\u7779}{\u7751}u, respectively.}

\par sarve{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7747} da{\u347}am {\u299}{\u347}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} pariv{\u257}ra{\u347}ata{\u7747} {\u347}ata{\u7747}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }52a {\b sarve{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; sarve{\u7779}{\u257} {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b da{\u347}am {\u299}{\u347}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; da{\u347}ar{\u299}{\u347}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }52b {\b pariv{\u257}ra{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; pari{\u176} {Cb}, pariv{\u257}ra{\u7747} {Na}}

\par {\u347}at{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} p{\u7771}thag ekaika{\u7747} sahasrai{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam||1.52||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }52d {\b sahasrai{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sahasrai \msM{\u8226}

		 {\b {\u176}v{\u257}ritam] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Cc}<corr>pc</corr>{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}v{\u257}rit{\u257} {Cc}<corr>ac</corr>, {\u176}v{\u257}rita{\u7717} \msM, {\u176}v{\u257}rit{\u257}{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par sahasre{\u7779}u ca ekaikam ayutai{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }53ab {\b ekaikam a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; ekaika{\u7747} ma{\u176} {Cc}{Na}\msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }53b {\b pariv{\u257}ritam] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; pariv{\u257}rita{\u7717} \msM, pariv{\u257}ritam{\u257}{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par ayuta{\u7747} prayutair v{\u7771}ndai{\u7717} prayuta{\u7747} niyutair v{\u7771}ta{\u7717}||1.53||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }53c {\b ayuta{\u7747}] }  {Ed}; ayutai{\u7717} {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM, ayutai {Nb}{\u8226}

                 {\b prayutair v{\u7771}ndai{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; prayutai v{\u7771}ndai{\u7717} {Nc}, 

                                                                prayutair bh{\u7771}tya \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }53d {\b prayuta{\u7747} niyutair v{\u7771}tam] }  {\i eme. }; prayutair niyutair v{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc},

                        prayuter niyutair v{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Cc}, prayutai niyutai v{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Nb},

                        prayuta{\u7717} niyutai{\u7717} v{\u7771}ta{\u7717} \msM, prayuta{\u7747} niyutair v{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }We are forced to follow {Ed}'s readings here to make sense of this passage.
              Note that <SKT>v{\u7771}nda</SKT> is not a number here. Elsewhere in this chapter it is the word that
                                        signifies `a billion'.} 

\par ekaikasya par{\u299}v{\u257}ro niyuta{\u7717} p{\u7771}thag eva ca|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }54a {\b par{\u299}v{\u257}ro] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; pariv{\u257}ra \msM\ (<i>unmetrical</i>), pariv{\u257}ro {Ed}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>)}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }54b {\b niyuta{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; niyuta {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}<corr>pc</corr>\msM{Ed}; ca{\u7717} {Nc}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par ko{\u7789}ibhir da{\u347}ako{\u7789}yena ekaika{\u7717} pariv{\u257}rita{\u7717}||1.54||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }54c {\b ko{\u7789}ibhir da{\u347}ako{\u7789}yena] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Ed}; ko{\u7789}ibhi da{\u347}ako{\u7789}yena {Cb},

                                ko{\u7789}ibhir da{\u347}ako{\u7789}yona {Na}{Nc}, ko{\u7789}ibhir da{\u347}ako{\u7789}yena{\u7717} {Nb},

                                ko{\u7789}ibhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}r{\u257}{\u7751}i ko{\u7789}ibhi da{\u347}ako{\u7789}ikam \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }54d {\b ekaika{\u7717} pariv{\u257}rita{\u7717}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Ed}; ekaika{\u7717} parivari{\u8768}ta{\u7717}{\u8768} {Ca}, 

                                                ekaikapariv{\u257}rita{\u7717} {Cc}{Nb}{Nc}, ekaikapariv{\u257}r{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note how the scribe of \msM\ gets confused due to an eye-skip at 1.54c and 
                fully regains control only at 1.56b.}

\par da{\u347}ako{\u7789}i{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747} v{\u7771}ndav{\u7771}ndabh{\u7771}tair v{\u7771}tam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }55a {\b da{\u347}ako{\u7789}i{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747}] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Nb}{Ed}; da{\u347}ako{\u7789}{\u299}{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747} {Ca}{Na}{Nc}, 

                                                      da{\u347}ako{\u7789}ye{\u7779}u ekaka{\u7747} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }55b {\b v{\u7771}ndav{\u7771}ndabh{\u7771}tair v{\u7771}tam] }  {C}{Nb}; v{\u7771}ndav{\u7771}ndav{\u7771}tair v{\u7771}ta{\u7747} {Na},

                        v{\u7771}ndav{\u7771}ndabh{\u7771}tai v{\u7771}ta{\u7747} {Nc}, v{\u7771}ndrav{\u7771}nde{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747} \msM,

                                                         v{\u7771}ndav{\u7771}nda{\u7747} v{\u7771}tair v{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par v{\u7771}ndavarge{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747} kharvabhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam||1.55||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }55c {\b v{\u7771}ndavarge{\u7779}u] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; v{\u7771}ndavargebhi{\u7717} tai v{\u7771}tam \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }55d {\b kharvabhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}; kharvarbhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam {Nc}, 

                             kharv{\u257}bhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}r{\u257}{\u7751}i \msM, kharvarbhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}rita{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par kharvavarge{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747} da{\u347}akharvaga{\u7751}air v{\u7771}tam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }56a {\b kharvavarge{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; kharvavargeva ekakam \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }56b {\b da{\u347}akharvaga{\u7751}air v{\u7771}tam] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}; da{\u347}akharvaga{\u7751}ai v{\u7771}tam {Cb}, 

                        da{\u347}akharvaga{\u7751}e v{\u7771}tta{\u7747} {Nc}, da{\u347}akharve{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747} da{\u347}akharvaga{\u7751}air v{\u7771}tam \msM,

                                         da{\u347}akharvaga{\u7751}air v{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par da{\u347}akharve{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747} {\u347}a{\u7749}kubhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam||1.56||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }56c {\b {\u176}kharve{\u7779}u] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}garve{\u7779}u {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }56d {\b {\u347}a{\u7749}kubhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\u347}a{\u7749}kubhi{\u7717} pariv{\u257}rita{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par {\u347}a{\u7749}kubhi{\u7717} p{\u7771}thag ekaika{\u7747} padmena pariv{\u257}ritam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }57a {\b p{\u7771}thag ekaika{\u7747}] }  {\i eme. }; p{\u7771}thag enaiva {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}, p{\u7771}thag ainaiva {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }57b {\b {\u176}v{\u257}ritam] }  {Na}<corr>pc</corr>\msM; {\u176}v{\u257}rita{\u7717} {C}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}, {\u176}ta{\u7747} {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note <SKT>{\u347}a{\u7749}kubhi{\u7717} p{\u7771}thag...</SKT>: it stands for <SKT>{\u347}a{\u7749}k{\u363}{\u7779}u p{\u7771}thag...</SKT> (instrumental for locative).}

\par padmavarge{\u7779}u ekaika{\u7747} samudrai{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam||1.57||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }57d {\b samudrai{\u7717}] }  {Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; samudai{\u7717} {Ca}, damu{\u8768}dai{\u7717}{\u8768} {Cb}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}v{\u257}ritam] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\u176}v{\u257}rita{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par samudre{\u7779}u tathaikaika{\u7747} madhyasa{\u7747}khyais tu tair v{\u7771}tam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }58a {\b tathai{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; tathe{\u176} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }58b {\b madhyasa{\u7747}khyais tu tair v{\u7771}tam] }  {C}{Na}\msM;

                        madhyasakhyais tu tai v{\u7771}tam {Nb},

                        madhyasakhyais tu ter v{\u7771}ta{\u7747} {Nc},

                        madhye {\u347}a{\u7749}khy{\u257}yutair v{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par madhyasa{\u7747}khye{\u7779}u ekaikam anantai{\u7717} pariv{\u257}ritam||1.58||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }58c {\b madhyasa{\u7747}khye{\u7779}u] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; madhyas{\u257}{\u7747}kho ca \msM, madhye {\u347}a{\u7747}khe{\u7779}u {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }58cd {\b ekaikam anantai{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; ekaika{\u7747} manatai{\u7717} {Nc}, ekaika{\u7747} anantai \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }58d {\b {\u176}v{\u257}ritam] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM; {\u176}v{\u257}rita{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par anante{\u7779}u ca ekaika{\u7747} par{\u257}rdhapariv{\u257}ritam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }59b {\b par{\u257}rdhapariv{\u257}ritam] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; par{\u257}rdha×××ritam {Cc},

                    par{\u257}rdhai pariv{\u257}ritam| anante{\u7779}u ca ekaika{\u7747} par{\u257}rdhapariv{\u257}rita{\u7747} \msM, par{\u257}rdhai{\u7717} pariv{\u257}rita{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par par{\u257}rdhe{\u7779}u ca ekaika{\u7747} pare{\u7751}a pariv{\u257}ritam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }59d {\b {\u176}v{\u257}ritam] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM; {\u176}v{\u257}riv{\u257}rita{\u7747} {Nb}, {\u176}v{\u257}rita{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par e{\u7779}a vai kathito vipra {\u347}akya{\u7747} s{\u257}{\u7747}khyam ud{\u299}ritam||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }59e {\b kathito] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM; {\u8768}kathito{\u8768} {Nb}, kathit{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }59f {\b {\u347}akya{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u347}akya {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b s{\u257}{\u7747}khyam u{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Nb}\msM; s{\u257}khyam u{\u176} {Cb}, syakhyam u{\u176} {Na},

                                                sa{\u7747}khyam u {Nc}, sa{\u7747}khy{\u257}m u{\u176} {Ed}}

\par{\b [  pram{\u257}{\u7751}am 
 ]}
\par pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u me vipra sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ep{\u257}d bruvato mama|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }60a {\b pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747}] }  {Cc}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; pra{\u7751}{\u257}ma{\u7747} {Ca}{Cb}, pram{\u257}{\u7751}a {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }60b {\b sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ep{\u257}d bruvato] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ep{\u257}d vadato {Cb},

                                        sa{\u7747}khyep{\u257}d bruvato {Nc}, sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}epa bruvato \msM}

\par candrodaye p{\u363}r{\u7751}am{\u257}sy{\u257}{\u7747} vapur a{\u7751}{\u7693}asya t{\u257}d{\u7771}{\u347}am||1.60||

\par ko{\u7789}iko{\u7789}isahasra{\u7747} tu yojan{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} samantata{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }61a {\b ko{\u7789}iko{\u7789}i{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; ko{\u7789}{\u299}ko{\u7789}i{\u176} \msM}

\par a{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} ca par{\u299}m{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} brahma{\u7751}{\u257} parik{\u299}rtitam||1.61||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }61a {\b ca par{\u299}m{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; ca parim{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} {Cb}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>),

                                                parim{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u241} ca \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }61b {\b brahma{\u7751}{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; ××× {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}k{\u299}rtitam] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}k{\u299}rti{\u8768}t{\u257}{\u7717}{\u8768} {Cc}, {\u176}k{\u299}rtita{\u7717} {Na}\msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }a{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} plural...: a new egg in every mah{\u257}kalpa? CHECK}

\par saptako{\u7789}isahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i saptako{\u7789}i{\u347}at{\u257}ni ca|

\par vi{\u7747}{\u347}ako{\u7789}i{\u7779}u gulme{\u7779}u {\u363}rdhvatas tapate ravi{\u7717}||1.62||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }62c {\b vi{\u7747}{\u347}ako{\u7789}i{\u7779}u gulme{\u7779}u] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; vi{\u7747}{\u347}ako{\u7789}i vin{\u257} gulme \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }62d {\b {\u363}rdhvatas ta{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u363}rddhvato ta{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b ravi{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM; ravi {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }62 <SKT>The folio in {Nb}\ ends with </SKT> {\u363}rdhva{\u176}, <SKT>and the folios that 

                may have contained verses 1.62d-2.22 are missing.</SKT>}

\par pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} n{\u257}ma sa{\u7747}khy{\u257} ca k{\u299}rtit{\u257}ni sam{\u257}sata{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }63a {\b pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; pra{\u7751}{\u257}ma{\u7747} {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the mixture of different grammatical genders and numbers here. 
                Understand <SKT>pram{\u257}{\u7751}e{\u7779}u sa{\u7747}khy{\u257}{\u7717} k{\u299}rtit{\u257}{\u7717} sam{\u257}sata{\u7717}</SKT>.}

\par brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7747} c{\u257}pramey{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} lak{\u7779}a{\u7751}a{\u7747} parik{\u299}rtitam||1.63||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }63c {\b brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7747} c{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Na}; brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u347} ca {Ca}{Cb}{Nc}\msM, {\u8768}brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}{\u347} c{\u257}{\u8768}{\u176} {Cc}, 

                                                                brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}{\u347} c{\u257} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}mey{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Na}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}mey{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257} {Cb}{Cc}{Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }63d {\b {\u176}k{\u299}rtitam] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}k{\u299}rtit{\u257}{\u7717} {Cc}, {\u176}k{\u299}rttita{\u7717} \msM}

\par{\b [  vy{\u257}s{\u257}{\u7717} 
 ]}
\par pur{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u347}{\u299}sahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i {\u347}at{\u257}ni dvijasattama|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }64b {\b {\u176}sattama] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; ××ma{\u7717}  {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }<SKT>P{\u257}da</SKT> a should probably be analysed and interpreted as 
                        <SKT>pur{\u257}{\u7751}am (pur{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}n{\u257}m a{\u347}{\u299}tisahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i {\u347}at{\u257}ni {\u347}lok{\u257}ni) brahma{\u7751}{\u257} kathitam</SKT>.
                        Alternatively, p{\u257}da a may have originally read <SKT>pur{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}ni sahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i</SKT>,
                        and then the inital number of verses transmitted by Brahm{\u257} is
                        a hundred thousand.
                <sep/>
                Compare this list to Vi{\u7779}{\u7751}upur{\u257}{\u7751}a 3.3.11-19:
                <sep/>
                <SKT>dv{\u257}pare prathame vyasta{\u7717} svaya{\u7747} veda{\u7717} svaya{\u7747}bhuv{\u257}|<br/>
                dvit{\u299}ye dv{\u257}pare caiva vedavy{\u257}sa{\u7717} praj{\u257}pati||<br/>
                t{\u7771}t{\u299}ye co{\u347}an{\u257} vy{\u257}sa{\u347} caturthe ca b{\u7771}haspati{\u7717}| <br/>
                savit{\u257} pa{\u241}came vy{\u257}sa{\u7717} {\u7779}a{\u7779}{\u7789}he m{\u7771}tyu{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717} prabhu{\u7717}|| <br/>
                saptame ca tathaivendro vasi{\u7779}{\u7789}ha{\u347} c{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}ame sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}| <br/>
                s{\u257}rasvata{\u347} ca navame tridh{\u257}m{\u257} da{\u347}ame sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|| <br/>
                ek{\u257}da{\u347}e tu tri{\u347}ikho bharadv{\u257}jas tata{\u7717} para{\u7717}| <br/>
                trayoda{\u347}e c{\u257}ntarik{\u7779}o var{\u7751}{\u299} c{\u257}pi caturda{\u347}e|| <br/>
                trayy{\u257}ru{\u7751}a{\u7717} pa{\u241}cada{\u347}e {\u7779}o{\u7693}a{\u347}e tu dhana{\u241}jaya{\u7717}| <br/>
                kratu{\u241}jaya{\u7717} saptada{\u347}e tad{\u363}rdhva{\u7747} ca jaya{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|| <br/>
                tato vy{\u257}so bharadv{\u257}jo bharadv{\u257}j{\u257}c ca gautama{\u7717}| <br/>
                gautam{\u257}d uttaro vy{\u257}so hary{\u257}tm{\u257} yo 'bhidh{\u299}yate|| <br/>
                atha hary{\u257}tmanonte ca sm{\u7771}to v{\u257}ja{\u347}rav{\u257}muni{\u7717}| <br/>
                soma{\u347}u{\u7779}k{\u257}ya{\u7751}as tasm{\u257}t t{\u7771}{\u7751}abindur iti sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|| <br/>
                {\u7771}k{\u7779}obh{\u363}dbh{\u257}rgavas tasm{\u257}d v{\u257}lm{\u299}kir yo 'bhidh{\u299}yate| <br/>
                tasm{\u257}d asmatpit{\u257} {\u347}aktir vy{\u257}sas tasm{\u257}d aha{\u7747} mune|| <br/>
                j{\u257}tukar{\u7751}o 'bhavan matta{\u7717} k{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7751}advaip{\u257}yanas tata{\u7717}| <br/>
                a{\u7779}{\u7789}avi{\u7747}{\u347}atir ity ete vedavy{\u257}s{\u257}{\u7717} pur{\u257}tan{\u257}{\u7717}||  <br/></SKT>
                <sep/>
                Another relevant passage is Brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}apur{\u257}{\u7751}a 3.4.58cd-67:
                <sep/>
                <SKT>brahm{\u257} dadau {\u347}{\u257}stram ida{\u7747} pur{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} m{\u257}tari{\u347}vane|| <br/>
                tasm{\u257}c co{\u347}anas{\u257} pr{\u257}pta{\u7747} tasm{\u257}c c{\u257}pi b{\u7771}haspati{\u7717}|   <br/>
                b{\u7771}haspatis tu prov{\u257}ca savitre tadanantaram||   <br/>
                savit{\u257} m{\u7771}tyave pr{\u257}ha m{\u7771}tyu{\u347} cendr{\u257}ya vai puna{\u7717}| <br/>
                indra{\u347} c{\u257}pi vasi{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}ya so 'pi s{\u257}rasvat{\u257}ya cai|| <br/>
                s{\u257}rasvatas tridh{\u257}mne 'tha tridh{\u257}m{\u257} ca {\u347}aradvate| <br/>
                {\u347}aradv{\u257}{\u7747}s tu trivi{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}ya so 'ntarik{\u7779}{\u257}ya dattav{\u257}n|| <br/>
                car{\u7779}i{\u7751}e c{\u257}ntarik{\u7779}o vai so 'pi trayy{\u257}ru{\u7751}{\u257}ya ca| <br/>
                trayy{\u257}ru{\u7751}{\u257}d dhana{\u241}jaya{\u7717} sa vai pr{\u257}d{\u257}t k{\u7771}ta{\u241}jaye|| <br/>
                k{\u7771}ta{\u241}jay{\u257}t t{\u7771}{\u7751}a{\u241}jayo bharadv{\u257}j{\u257}ya so 'py atha|   <br/>
                gautam{\u257}ya bharadv{\u257}ja{\u7717} so 'pi niryyantare puna{\u7717}|| <br/>
                niryyantaras tu prov{\u257}ca tath{\u257} v{\u257}ja{\u347}rav{\u257}ya vai|   <br/>
                sa dadau soma{\u347}u{\u7779}m{\u257}ya sa c{\u257}d{\u257}t t{\u7771}{\u7751}abindave|| <br/>
                t{\u7771}{\u7751}abindus tu dak{\u7779}{\u257}ya dak{\u7779}a{\u7717} prov{\u257}ca {\u347}aktaye| <br/>
                {\u347}akte{\u7717} par{\u257}{\u347}ara{\u347} c{\u257}pi garbhastha{\u7717} {\u347}rutav{\u257}nidam|| <br/>
                par{\u257}{\u347}ar{\u257}j j{\u257}tukar{\u7751}yas tasm{\u257}d dvaip{\u257}yana{\u7717} prabhu{\u7717}|   <br/>
                dvaip{\u257}yan{\u257}t puna{\u347} c{\u257}pi may{\u257} pr{\u257}pta{\u7747} dvijottama|| <br/>
                may{\u257} caitat puna{\u7717} prokta{\u7747} putr{\u257}y{\u257}mitabuddhaye|   <br/>
                ity eva v{\u257}kya{\u7747} brahm{\u257}diguru{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} samud{\u257}h{\u7771}tam||  </SKT> <br/>
                }

\par brahma{\u7751}{\u257} kathita{\u7747} p{\u363}r{\u7751}a{\u7747} m{\u257}tari{\u347}v{\u257} yath{\u257}tatham||1.64||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }64c {\b p{\u363}r{\u7751}a{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Ed}; p{\u363}rve {Cb}, p{\u363}r{\u7751}{\u7751}a {Nc}, p{\u363}rva{\u7747} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }64d {\b m{\u257}tari{\u347}v{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; m{\u257}tari{\u347}va \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}tatham] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}tath{\u257} {Cc}\msM}

\par v{\u257}yun{\u257} p{\u257}da sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ipya pr{\u257}pta{\u7747} co{\u347}anasa{\u7747} pur{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }65a {\b sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ipya] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ipya{\u7717} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }65b {\b pr{\u257}pta{\u7747} co{\u347}anasa{\u7747}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nc}; pr{\u257}pta{\u7747} causanasa{\u7747} {Ca}, pr{\u257}pta¤ausanasa{\u7747} {Cc},

                                           pr{\u257}pt{\u257}{\u347} co{\u347}anasama \msM\ (<i>unmetrical</i>), pr{\u257}pta{\u347} co{\u347}anasa{\u7747} {Ed}}

\par ten{\u257}pi p{\u257}da sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ipya pr{\u257}ptav{\u257}{\u7747}{\u347} ca b{\u7771}haspati{\u7717}||1.65||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }65c {\b sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ipya] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ipya{\u7717} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }65d {\b pr{\u257}ptav{\u257}{\u7747}{\u347} ca b{\u7771}haspati{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; pr{\u257}ptadha{\u241} ca v{\u7771}haspati \msM}

\par b{\u7771}haspatis tu prov{\u257}ca s{\u363}rya{\u7747} tri{\u7747}{\u347}atsahasrikam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }66b {\b s{\u363}rya{\u7747}] }  {Cc}{Ed}; s{\u363}ryas {Ca}{Na}{Nc}, s{\u363}rya {Cb}\msM{\u8226}

                 {\b tri{\u7747}{\u347}atsa{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; tri{\u7747}{\u347}asa{\u176} {Cc}\msM}

\par pa{\u241}cavi{\u7747}{\u347}atsahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i m{\u7771}tyu{\u7747} pr{\u257}ha div{\u257}kara{\u7717}||1.66||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }66c {\b {\u176}vi{\u7747}{\u347}atsahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i] }  {\i corr. }; {\u176}vi{\u7747}{\u347}ahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i {Ca},

                                            {\u176}vi{\u7747}{\u347}asahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}\msM, {\u176}vi{\u347}atsahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }66d {\b m{\u7771}tyu{\u7747} pr{\u257}ha] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; m{\u7771}tyu pr{\u257}ha{\u7717} \msM}

\par ekavi{\u7747}{\u347}atsahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i m{\u7771}tyunendr{\u257}ya k{\u299}rtitam| 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }67a {\b {\u176}vi{\u7747}{\u347}at{\u176}] }  {Ed}; {\u176}vi{\u7747}{\u347}a{\u176} {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }67b {\b k{\u299}rtitam] }  {Ed}; k{\u299}rtita{\u7717} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}<corr>pc</corr>\msM, k{\u299}rtit{\u257}{\u7717} {Cc}, k{\u299}rttita {Nc}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par indre{\u7751}{\u257}ha vasi{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257}ya vi{\u7747}{\u347}at{\u347}lokasahasrikam||1.67||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }67c {\b vasi{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257}ya] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}\msM{Ed}; vi{\u347}i{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257}ya {Cb}, vahi{\u7779}{\u7789}h{\u257}ya {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }67d {\b vi{\u7747}{\u347}at{\u347}lo{\u176}] }  {\i corr. }; vi{\u7747}{\u347}a{\u347}lo{\u176} {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}, vi{\u347}a{\u347}lo{\u176} {Cb}, tri{\u7747}{\u347}a{\u347}lo{\u176} \msM}

\par a{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}da{\u347}asahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i tena s{\u257}rasvat{\u257}ya tu|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }68a {\b a{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}da{\u347}asahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i] }  {C}{Na}{Ed}; {\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}da{\u347}asahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i {Nc}, vasi{\u7779}{\u7789}heda{\u347}asahasra{\u7747} \msM}

\par s{\u257}rasvatas tridh{\u257}m{\u257}ya sahasrada{\u347}a sapta ca||1.68||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }68c {\b s{\u257}rasvatas tri{\u176}] }  {\i eme. }; s{\u257}rasvat{\u257} tri{\u176} {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}, s{\u257}rasvat{\u257}s tri{\u176} {Cb},

                                                        s{\u257}rasvata t{\u7771}{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}dh{\u257}m{\u257}ya] }  {C}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\i omitted in }\ {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }68d {\b sahasrada{\u347}a] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; sahasr{\u257}da{\u347}a \msM}

\par {\u7779}o{\u7693}a{\u347}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} sahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i bharadv{\u257}j{\u257}ya vai tata{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }69b {\b bhara{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; bh{\u257}ra{\u176} {Cc}, sana{\u176} \msM}

\par da{\u347}a pa{\u241}casahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i triv{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u257}ya abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata||1.69||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }69d {\b abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}; a{\u8768}bh{\u257}{\u7779}ata{\u8768} {Cc}, abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata{\u7717} {Nc}{Ed}, mabh{\u257}sata{\u7717} \msM}

\par caturda{\u347}asahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i antar{\u299}k{\u7779}{\u257}ya vai tata{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }70b {\b antar{\u299}{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; antari{\u176} \msM}

\par trayy{\u257}ru{\u7751}i{\u7747} sahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i trayoda{\u347}a abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata||1.70||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }70c {\b trayy{\u257}ru{\u7751}i{\u7747}] }  {\i corr. }; tryaiy{\u257}ru{\u7751}i {Ca}{Cb}{Na}\msM, traiy{\u257}ru{\u7751}i {Cc}{Ed}, tryaiy{\u257}r{\u363}pini {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }70d {\b abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Nc}; abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata{\u7717} {Cb}, svabh{\u257}vata {Na}, mabh{\u257}sata{\u7717} \msM,

                                                 hy abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata {Ed}}

\par trayy{\u257}ru{\u7751}is tu viprendro dhana{\u7747}jayam abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }71a {\b trayy{\u257}ru{\u7751}i{\u176}] }  {\i corr. }; tryaiy{\u257}ru{\u7751}i{\u176} {C}{Nc}, traiy{\u257}ru{\u7751}i{\u176} {Na}{Ed}, tryairy{\u257}ru{\u7751}i{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b viprendro] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; viprenda {Cc}\msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }71b {\b dhana{\u7747}jaya{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc}\msM{Ed}; dhana{\u176} {Na}<corr>ac</corr>{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}bh{\u257}{\u7779}ata] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}bh{\u257}{\u7779}ata{\u7717} {Cb}\msM{Ed}}

\par dv{\u257}da{\u347}{\u257}ni sahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}ipya punar abrav{\u299}t||1.71||

\par k{\u7771}ta{\u7747}jay{\u257}ya sampr{\u257}pto dhana{\u7747}jayamah{\u257}muni{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }72b {\b {\u176}muni{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}mu{\u7751}i \msM}

\par k{\u7771}ta{\u7747}jay{\u257}d dvija{\u347}re{\u7779}{\u7789}ha {\u7771}{\u7751}a{\u7747}jayamah{\u257}tmane||1.72||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }72c {\b k{\u7771}ta{\u7747}jay{\u257}d dvi{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Ed}; k{\u7771}ta{\u7747}jay{\u257} dvi{\u176} {Cb}{Cc}{Nc}, dhana{\u241}jaya dvi{\u176} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}{\u347}re{\u7779}{\u7789}ha] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM; {\u176}{\u347}re{\u7779}{\u7789}ho {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }72d {\b {\u7771}{\u7751}a{\u7747}jaya{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u7771}{\u7751}a{\u7747}j{\u257}ya{\u176} {Cb}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}mah{\u257}tmane] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}mabh{\u257}{\u347}ata{\u7717} \msM}

\par {\u7771}{\u7751}a{\u241}jay{\u257}t puna{\u7717} pr{\u257}pto gautam{\u257}ya mahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}e|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }73a {\b pr{\u257}pto] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; pr{\u257}pta{\u7717} \msM, pr{\u257}ptau {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }73b {\b mahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}e] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; mahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}a{\u7717} \msM}

\par gautam{\u257}c ca bharadv{\u257}jas tasm{\u257}d dharyadvat{\u257}ya tu||1.73||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }73c {\b gautam{\u257}c ca] }  {C}{Na}{Ed}; gautam{\u257}{\u347} ca {Nc}, gautamena \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }73cd {\b bharadv{\u257}jas tasm{\u257}d dharyadvat{\u257}ya] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc};

                                 bharadv{\u257}ras tasm{\u257}d dharyadvat{\u257}ya {Cb}, 

                                 bharadv{\u257}ja tasm{\u257} haryadvat{\u257}ya \msM, 

                                 bharadv{\u257}jas tasm{\u257}d damy{\u257}ddam{\u257}ya {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The name <SKT>harmyadvata</SKT> is probably a variant or a corrupted form
                        of <SKT>harmy{\u257}tman</SKT>, who appears in lists of <SKT>vedavy{\u257}sa</SKT>s
                        in the Pur{\u257}{\u7751}as (see note to 1.64).}

\par r{\u257}ja{\u347}rav{\u257}s tata{\u7717} pr{\u257}pta{\u7717} soma{\u347}u{\u7779}m{\u257}ya vai tata{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }74a {\b r{\u257}ja{\u347}rav{\u257}s ta{\u176}] }  {\i eme. }; r{\u257}ja{\u347}rava ta{\u176} {C}{Na}{Ed}, r{\u257}ja{\u347}rava ta{\u176} {Nc}, 

                                                                r{\u257}jar{\u7779}ava ta{\u176} \msM}

\par soma{\u347}u{\u7779}m{\u257}t tata{\u7717} pr{\u257}ptas t{\u7771}{\u7751}abindus tu bho dvija||1.74||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }74c {\b {\u176}{\u347}u{\u7779}m{\u257}t ta{\u176}] }  {C}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\u176}{\u347}u{\u7779}m{\u257} ta{\u176} {Na}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }74cd {\b pr{\u257}ptas t{\u7771}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; pr{\u257}{\u8768}pta t{\u7771}{\u8768}{\u176} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }74d {\b bho] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; {\i omitted in }\ {Cb}}

\par t{\u7771}{\u7751}abindus tu v{\u7771}k{\u7779}{\u257}ya v{\u7771}k{\u7779}a{\u7717} {\u347}aktim abh{\u257}{\u7779}ata|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }75b {\b v{\u7771}k{\u7779}a{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; v{\u7771}k{\u7779}a \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}bh{\u257}{\u7779}ata] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}bh{\u257}{\u7779}ata{\u7717} {Cc}\msM{Ed}}

\par {\u347}akti{\u7717} par{\u257}{\u347}ara{\u7747} pr{\u257}ha j{\u257}t{\u363}kar{\u7751}{\u257}ya vai tata{\u7717}||1.75||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }75c {\b {\u347}akti{\u7717} par{\u257}{\u347}ara{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u347}apar{\u257}sara \msM<corr>ac</corr>, {\u347}akti par{\u257}sara \msM<corr>pc</corr>}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }75d {\b j{\u257}t{\u363}{\u176}] }  {\i corr. }; jatu{\u176} {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}, tu{\u176} {Cb}, ja{\u7747}tu{\u176} \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Perhaps keep jatu{\u176}.}

\par dvaip{\u257}yana{\u7747} tu prov{\u257}ca j{\u257}t{\u363}kar{\u7751}o mahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}am|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }76a {\b dvaip{\u257}yana{\u7747} tu] }  {\i eme. }; dvaip{\u257}yanas tu {C}{Na}{Nc}\msM, dvaip{\u257}yan{\u257}ya {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }76b {\b j{\u257}t{\u363}kar{\u7751}o mahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}am] }  {\i eme. };

                         jatukar{\u7751}o mahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}am {Ca}{Cb}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc}, jatukar{\u7751}{\u257} mahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}a{\u7717} {Cc}, 

                         jakar{\u7751}o mahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}a{\u7747} {Na}<corr>ac</corr>, ja{\u7747}tukar{\u7751}{\u7751}amahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}{\u257} \msM, jatukar{\u7751}amahar{\u7779}i{\u7751}{\u257} {Ed}}

\par romahar{\u7779}{\u257}ya sampr{\u257}pto dvaip{\u257}yanamah{\u257}muni{\u7717}||1.76||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }76d {\b {\u176}muni{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}muni \msM{Ed}}

\par romahar{\u7779}{\u257}ya prov{\u257}ca putr{\u257}y{\u257}mitabuddhaye|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }77a {\b {\u176}har{\u7779}{\u257}ya] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}har{\u7779}e{\u7751}a \msM, {\u176}har{\u7779}a{\u7751}{\u257}ya {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }77b {\b {\u176}buddhaye] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}buddhaya{\u7717} \msM}

\par da{\u347}adve ca sahasr{\u257}{\u7751}i pur{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} samprak{\u257}{\u347}itam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }77b {\b pur{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} samprak{\u257}{\u347}itam] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}\msM{Ed}; pur{\u257}{\u7751}a samprak{\u257}{\u347}it{\u257}{\u7747} {Cc}}

\par m{\u257}nu{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} hit{\u257}rth{\u257}ya ki{\u7747} bh{\u363}ya{\u7717} {\u347}rotum icchasi||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }77e {\b m{\u257}nu{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; manu{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} {Cb}, m{\u257}nu{\u7779}{\u257}n{\u257} \msM{\u8226}

                 {\b hit{\u257}rth{\u257}ya] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; hityath{\u257}ya \msM}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }77f {\b bh{\u363}ya{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; bh{\u363}ya \msM{Ed}}

<TEXT> \par ||iti v{\u7771}{\u7779}as{\u257}rasa{\u7747}grahe brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}asa{\u7747}khy{\u257} n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}ya{\u7717} prathama{\u7717}||\par

        {\footnote {\chftn ) } <SKT> \Colo: </SKT> {\b n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}ya{\u7717} prathama{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}ya{\u7717} prathama{\u7717} {\u347}loka 77 \msM,

                                n{\u257}ma prathamo 'dhy{\u257}ya {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Manuscripts {Cc}\ and \msM\ place the <SKT>iti</SKT> of the colophon at the end of the last {\u347}loka, before
                the da{\u7751}{\u7693}as, thus: <SKT>icchas{\u299}ti ||@||</SKT> ({Cc}) and <SKT>icchasi iti ||o||</SKT> (\msM).
                Note also that \msM\ gives the number of {\u347}lokas in this chapter, 77, which is exactly
                the number of verses this critical edition has produced. The scribe of \msM\ struggled 
                with eyeskips in this chapter, therefore it seems unlikely that he himself
                counted the number of verses he had copied and arrived at this very figure.
                Rather, he copied the number from his exemplar.}      

\par[ Chapter 2  ]\par
\par{\b [  dvit{\u299}yo 'dhy{\u257}ya{\u7717} 
 ]}
\par vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca| 

\par {\u347}ruta{\u7747} may{\u257} jan{\u257}gre{\u7751}a brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}asya tu nir{\u7751}ayam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }1a {\b jan{\u257}gre{\u7751}a] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; jan{\u257}×× {Ca}}

\par pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} var{\u7751}ar{\u363}pa{\u7747} ca sa{\u7747}khy{\u257} tasya sam{\u257}sata{\u7717}||2.1||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }1<SKT>Testimonia for this chapter: {Ca}\ ff.\thinspace 195v-197r, 

                                             {Cb}\ ff.\thinspace 203v-204v, 

                                             {Cc}\ ff.\thinspace 270r-270v (it breaks off at 2.21 and resumes at 3.30b),

                                             {Na}\ ff.\thinspace 3v-4v, 

                                             {Nb}\ exp.\thinspace 43 and 42 (sic!) (it broke off at 1.62d and resumes at 2.23),

                                             {Nc}\ ff.\thinspace 211v-213r;

                {C}\ = {Ca} + {Cb} + {Cc} </SKT>}

\par {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}eti tvay{\u257} prokto brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}layak{\u299}rtita{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }2b {\b brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}a {Ed}}

\par k{\u299}d{\u7771}{\u347}a{\u7747} lak{\u7779}a{\u7751}a{\u7747} j{\u241}eya{\u7747} pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} tasya v{\u257} kati||2.2||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }2c {\b j{\u241}eya{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; j{\u241}ey{\u257} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }2d {\b kati] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; kati{\u7717} {Cc}}

\par kasya v{\u257}layana{\u7747} j{\u241}eya{\u7747} pram{\u257}{\u7751}a{\u7747} v{\u257}tra v{\u257}sina{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }3a {\b layana{\u7747} j{\u241}eya{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}; layana{\u7747} {Cb}, lak{\u7779}a{\u7751}a{\u7747} j{\u241}eya{\u7747} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }3b {\b v{\u257}sina{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; v{\u257}sir{\u257}na{\u7717} {Cb}}

\par k{\u257} v{\u257} tatra praj{\u257} j{\u241}ey{\u257} ko v{\u257} tatra praj{\u257}pati{\u7717}||2.3||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }3c {\b k{\u257}] }  {\i eme. }; ko {C}{Na}{Nc}, ki{\u7747} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b praj{\u257} j{\u241}ey{\u257}] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; pra{\u8768}j{\u257}{\u8768}×y{\u257} {Ca}}

\par{\b [  {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}asa{\u7747}khy{\u257} 
 ]}
\par anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca| 

\par {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}alak{\u7779}a{\u7751}a{\u7747} vipra na tva{\u7747} pra{\u7779}{\u7789}um ih{\u257}rhasi|

   {\footnote {\chftn ) }4b {\b na tva{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; tatva{\u7747} {Ed}{\u8226}

            {\b {\u176}rhasi] }  {C}{Na}{Ed}; {\u176}hasi {Nc}}

\par daivatair api k{\u257} {\u347}aktir j{\u241}{\u257}tu{\u7747} dra{\u7779}{\u7789}u{\u7747} ca tattvata{\u7717}||2.4||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }4c {\b daivatai{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}; devatai{\u176} {Cc}{Nc}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u347}aktir] }  {Ca}; {\u347}akti {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}}

\par agamyagamana{\u7747} guhya{\u7747} guhy{\u257}d api samuddhitam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }5a {\b agamyagamana{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; agamyagagahana{\u7747} {Cc}, agamyagagamana{\u7747} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }5b {\b guhy{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Nc}{Ed}; guh{\u257}{\u176} {C}{Na}{\u8226}

                 {\b samuddhitam] }  {C}{Na}; samraddhita{\u7747} {Nc}, sam{\u7771}ddhidam {Ed}}

         {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }5 <SKT>cf. Li{\u7749}gapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.21.71ab: </SKT> namo gu{\u7751}y{\u257}ya guhy{\u257}ya agamyagaman{\u257}ya ca}

\par na prabhur netaras tatra na da{\u7751}{\u7693}yo na ca da{\u7751}{\u7693}aka{\u7717}||2.5||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }5c {\b prabhur ne{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; prane{\u176} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }5d {\b da{\u7751}{\u7693}yo] }  {Cc}{Na}{Nc}; da{\u7751}{\u7693}o {Ca}{Cb}, da{\u7751}{\u7693}y{\u257} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b da{\u7751}{\u7693}aka{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u7751}{\u7693}aka{\u7717} {Cb}<corr>ac</corr>, pa{\u7751}{\u7693}aka{\u7717} {Cb}<corr>pc</corr>}

\par na satyo n{\u257}n{\u7771}tas tatra su{\u347}{\u299}lo no du{\u7717}{\u347}{\u299}lav{\u257}n|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6a {\b satyo] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; satyau {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b tatra] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; tatr{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6b {\b no] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; × {Ca}}

\par n{\u257}n{\u7771}jur na ca dambhitva{\u7747} na t{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7751}{\u257} na ca {\u299}r{\u7779}yat{\u257}||2.6||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6c {\b n{\u257}n{\u7771}jur na] }  {\i eme. }; n{\u257}{\u7771}jur nna {Ca}{Ed}, n{\u257}{\u7771}jur na {Cb}{Nc}, n{\u257}{\u7771}jun na {Na},

                                                {\u8768}n{\u257}{\u7771}ju na{\u8768} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6d {\b na t{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7751}{\u257} na ca] }  {C}{Nc}{Ed};  na ca t{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7751}{\u257} na {Na}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u299}r{\u7779}yat{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u299}r{\u7779}yat{\u257}{\u7717} {Cc}, ir{\u7779}yat{\u257} {Ed}}

\par na krodho na ca lobho 'sti na m{\u257}no 'sti na s{\u363}yaka{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }7a {\b krodho] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; krodhau {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }7b {\b s{\u363}yaka{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}; s{\u363}caka{\u7717} {Cb}, steyaka{\u7717} {Ed}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>)}

\par {\u299}r{\u7779}y{\u257} dve{\u7779}o na tatr{\u257}sti na {\u347}a{\u7789}ho na ca matsara{\u7717}||2.7||

         {\footnote {\chftn ) }7d {\b {\u347}a{\u7789}ho] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u7779}a{\u7789}ho {Cc}, {\u347}a{\u7789}he {Ed}{\u8226}

                  {\b matsara{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; matsar{\u257}{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par na vy{\u257}dhir na jar{\u257} tatra na {\u347}oko 'sti na viklava{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }8a {\b vy{\u257}dhir na] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; vy{\u257}dhi na {Cc}{Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b jar{\u257} tatra] }  {Cb}{Nc}; jar{\u257}s tatra {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }8b {\b viklava{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; viklava {Ed}}

\par n{\u257}dhama{\u7717} puru{\u7779}as tatra nottamo na ca madhyama{\u7717}||2.8||

\par notk{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7789}o m{\u257}navas tasmin striya{\u347} caiva {\u347}iv{\u257}laye|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9a {\b m{\u257}nava{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; m{\u257}×va{\u176} {Ca}}

\par na nind{\u257} na pra{\u347}a{\u7747}s{\u257}sti matsar{\u299} pi{\u347}uno na ca||2.9||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9c {\b pra{\u347}a{\u7747}s{\u257}sti] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; pra{\u347}a{\u7747}s{\u257}{\u347} ca {Ed}}

\par garvadarpa{\u7747} na tatr{\u257}sti kr{\u363}ram{\u257}y{\u257}dika{\u7747} tath{\u257}|

\par y{\u257}cam{\u257}no na tatr{\u257}sti d{\u257}t{\u257} caiva na vidyate||2.10||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }10c {\b tatr{\u257}sti] }  {C}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc}{Ed}; tatr{\u257} {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par anarth{\u299} vraja tatrastha{\u7717} kalpav{\u7771}k{\u7779}asam{\u257}{\u347}rita{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11a {\b vraja ta{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Ed}; vrajas ta{\u176} {Nc}}

\par na karma n{\u257}priyas tatra na kali{\u7717} kalaho na ca||2.11||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11c {\b karma n{\u257}{\u176}] }  {\i eme. }; karma na {C}{Na}{Nc}, karma{\u7751}{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11d {\b kali{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}<corr>pc</corr>; kali {Nc}<corr>ac</corr>{Ed}}

\par dv{\u257}paro na ca na tret{\u257} k{\u7771}ta{\u7747} c{\u257}pi na vidyate|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12a {\b ca na tret{\u257}] }  {Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; ca na tretr{\u257} {Ca}, ca tret{\u257} na {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12b {\b k{\u7771}ta{\u7747} c{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Cc}{Na}; k{\u7771}ta{\u347} c{\u257}{\u176} {Ca}{Cb}{Nc}{Ed}}

\par manvantara{\u7747} na tatr{\u257}sti kalpa{\u347} caiva na vidyate||2.12||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12c {\b manvantara{\u7747} na tatr{\u257}sti] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; 

                                manvantatr{\u257}sti {Cc},

                                manvantarananta tatr{\u257}sti {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12d {\b kalpa{\u347} caiva] }  {C}{Nc}{Ed}; kalpa{\u7747} caiva {Na}}

\par {\u257}h{\u363}tasamplava{\u7747} n{\u257}sti brahmar{\u257}tridina{\u7747} tath{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13a {\b {\u257}h{\u363}ta{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; {\u257}bh{\u363}ta{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13b {\b brahmar{\u257}tridina{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; brahmar{\u257}tridivas {Ed}}

\par na janmamara{\u7751}a{\u7747} tatra {\u257}pada{\u7747} n{\u257}pnuy{\u257}t kvacit||2.13||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13c {\b janmamara{\u7751}a{\u7747} tatra] }  {Cc}{Na}{Ed}; janmara{\u7751}a{\u7747} tatra {Ca}{Cb},

                                                janmamara{\u7751}antrata {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13d {\b {\u257}pada{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; apada{\u7747} {Ed}}

\par na c{\u257}{\u347}{\u257}p{\u257}{\u347}abaddho 'sti r{\u257}gamoha{\u7747} na vidyate|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14a {\b c{\u257}{\u347}{\u257}p{\u257}{\u347}a{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Nc}<corr>pc</corr>; ca s{\u257}y{\u257}{\u347}a{\u176} {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}<corr>ac</corr>{Ed}{\u8226} 

                 {\b {\u176}baddho] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}ddho {Cc}, {\u176}v{\u7771}ddho {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14b {\b {\u176}moha{\u7747}] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}moho {Ca}}

\par na dev{\u257} n{\u257}sur{\u257}s tatra na yak{\u7779}oragar{\u257}k{\u7779}as{\u257}{\u7717}||2.14||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14c {\b dev{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; devo {Cb}}

\par na bh{\u363}t{\u257} na pi{\u347}{\u257}c{\u257}{\u347} ca gandharv{\u257} {\u7771}{\u7779}ayas tath{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15b {\b gandharv{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc};  gandharvo {Ed}}

\par t{\u257}r{\u257} graha{\u7747} na tatr{\u257}sti n{\u257}gaki{\u7747}narag{\u257}ru{\u7693}am||2.15||

\par na japo n{\u257}hnikas tatra n{\u257}gnihotr{\u299} na yaj{\u241}ak{\u7771}t|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }16a {\b japo] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; jayo {Ca}{\u8226}

                 {\b n{\u257}hnikas ta{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; n{\u257}hnika ta{\u176} {Cb}}

\par na vrata{\u7747} na tapa{\u347} caiva na tirya{\u7747} naraka{\u7747} tath{\u257}||2.16||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }16d {\b na tirya{\u7747} naraka{\u7747}] }  {\i eme. }; n{\u257}tiryannarakas {Ca}{Cc}{Na},

                                 n{\u257}tiryanarakan {Cb}, n{\u257}trirya{\u7747} narakas {Nc}, na t{\u299}rthannarakan {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }16d <SKT>Cf. 19.48cd: </SKT>vi{\u347}i{\u7779}{\u7789}he tv indriyagr{\u257}me tiryannarakas{\u257}dhanam}

\par tasye{\u347}{\u257}nasya devasya ai{\u347}varyagu{\u7751}avistaram|

\par api var{\u7779}a{\u347}aten{\u257}pi {\u347}akya{\u7747} vaktu{\u7747} na kenacit||2.17||

\par harecch{\u257}prabhav{\u257}{\u7717} sarve pary{\u257}ye{\u7751}a brav{\u299}mi te|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18a {\b harecch{\u257}prabhav{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Nc}; harecchaprabhav{\u257}{\u7717} {C}{Na}, harecch{\u257}prabhav{\u257} {Ed}}

\par devam{\u257}nu{\u7779}avarjy{\u257}ni v{\u7771}k{\u7779}agulmalat{\u257}daya{\u7717}||2.18||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18c {\b varjy{\u257}ni] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; vajj{\u241}{\u257}ni {Ed}}

\par par{\u257}rdhadvigu{\u7751}otsedh{\u257} vist{\u257}ra{\u347} ca tath{\u257}vidha{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19a {\b {\u176}gu{\u7751}otsedh{\u257}] }  {\i conj. }; {\u176}gu{\u7751}occhedh{\u257} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}, {\u176}gu{\u7751}ecchedh{\u257} {Cc}, {\u176}gu{\u7751}{\u257}cchredh{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19b {\b vist{\u257}ra{\u347} ca] }  {Nc}; vist{\u257}ra{\u7747} ca {C}{Na}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}vidha{\u7717}] }  {Nc}; {\u176}vidh{\u257} {C}{Na}{Ed}}

\par anek{\u257}k{\u257}rapu{\u7779}p{\u257}{\u7751}i phal{\u257}ni ca manoharam||2.19||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19c {\b anek{\u257}k{\u257}ra{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; anek{\u257}ra{\u176} {Ca}}

\par anye k{\u257}{\u241}canav{\u7771}k{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7751}i ma{\u7751}iv{\u7771}k{\u7779}{\u257}{\u7751}y ath{\u257}pare|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20a {\b anye] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; bahu{\u176} {Ed}}

\par prav{\u257}lama{\u7751}i{\u7779}a{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}{\u347} ca padmar{\u257}garuh{\u257}ni ca||2.20||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20c {\b {\u7779}a{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}{\u347} ca] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; gha{\u7751}{\u7789}{\u257}{\u347} ca {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20d {\b {\u176}ruh{\u257}ni] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}ruh{\u257}{\u7751}i {Cc}, {\u176}sah{\u257}ni {Ed}}

\par sv{\u257}dum{\u363}laphal{\u257}skandalat{\u257}vi{\u7789}apap{\u257}dap{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }21a {\b sv{\u257}du{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; sv{\u257}dhu{\u176} {Ca}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}m{\u363}la{\u176}] }  {C}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}m{\u363}l{\u257} {Na}}

\par k{\u257}mar{\u363}p{\u257}{\u347} ca te sarve k{\u257}mad{\u257}{\u7717} k{\u257}mabh{\u257}{\u7779}i{\u7751}a{\u7717}||2.21||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }After k{\u257}mar{\u363}{\u176}, MS {Cc}\ has some folios missing and resumes only at 3.XX. CHECK Florinda's pics!}

\par tatra vipra praj{\u257}{\u7717} sarve anantagu{\u7751}as{\u257}gar{\u257}{\u7717}|

\par tulyar{\u363}pabal{\u257}{\u7717} sarve s{\u363}ry{\u257}yutasamaprabh{\u257}{\u7717}||2.22||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22c {\b {\u176}b{\u257}l{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}var{\u257}{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par par{\u257}rdhadvayavist{\u257}ra{\u7747} par{\u257}rdhadvayam {\u257}yatam|

\par par{\u257}rdhadvayavik{\u7779}ep{\u257} yojan{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} dvijottama||2.23||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }23c {\b {\u176}dvaya{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}dva{\u176} {Na}<corr>ac</corr>{\u8226}

                 {\b vik{\u7779}ep{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; vij{\u241}ey{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }23d {\b {\u176}ttama] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}ttama{\u7717} {Na}}

\par ai{\u347}varyatva{\u7747} na sa{\u7747}khy{\u257}sti bala{\u347}akti{\u347} ca bho dvija|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24b {\b bala{\u347}akti{\u347} ca bho dvija] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Nc}; 

                                        {\i omitted in }\ {Na}<corr>ac</corr>, tava {\u347}akti{\u347} ca bho dvija {Ed}}

\par adhordhvo na ca sa{\u7747}khy{\u257}sti na tirya{\u241} caiti ka{\u347}cana||2.24||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24c {\b adhordhvo na ca sa{\u7747}khy{\u257}sti] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\i omitted in }\ {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24d {\b na tirya{\u241} caiti ka{\u347}cana] }  {Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc};

                                                na tirya{\u241} ceti ka{\u347}cana {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Ed},

                                                na tirya{\u7747} ceti ka{\u347}cana {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}asya ca vist{\u257}ram {\u257}y{\u257}ma{\u7747} ca na vedmy aham|

\par bhogam ak{\u7779}ayas tatraiva janmam{\u7771}tyur na vidyate||2.25||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }25c {\b bhogam ak{\u7779}ayas ta{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; bhogamay{\u257}s tu ta{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }25d {\b {\u176}m{\u7771}tyur na] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}m{\u7771}tyu na {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }P{\u257}da c is unmetrical, or rather, a ra-vipul{\u257} with licence 
                (tatraiva as SHORT-LONG). Note also the gender problem 
                (<SKT>bhogam ak{\u7779}ayas</SKT>), or rather take <SKT>-m-</SKT> as a sandhi-bridge 
                (<SKT>bhoga-m-ak{\u7779}ayas</SKT>, for <SKT>bhogo 'k{\u7779}ayas</SKT>).}

\par {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}amadhyam {\u257}{\u347}ritya gok{\u7779}{\u299}rasad{\u7771}{\u347}aprabh{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }26b {\b prabh{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; prabh{\u257} {Ed}}

\par par{\u257}rdhaparako{\u7789}{\u299}n{\u257}m {\u299}{\u347}{\u257}n{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} sm{\u7771}t{\u257}laya{\u7717}||2.26||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }26d {\b {\u176}{\u347}{\u257}n{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; {\u176}{\u347}{\u257}n{\u257}n{\u257} {Nb}, {\u176}g{\u257}n{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b sm{\u7771}t{\u257}laya{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Nb}{Nc}; sm{\u7771}t{\u257}laya {Cb}, sm{\u7771}t{\u257}laya{\u7747} {Na}, sm{\u7771}t{\u257}lay{\u257} {Ed}}

\par b{\u257}las{\u363}ryaprabh{\u257}{\u7717} sarve j{\u241}ey{\u257}s tatpuru{\u7779}{\u257}laye|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27a {\b {\u176}bh{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}bh{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27b {\b j{\u241}ey{\u257}s ta{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}; j{\u241}ey{\u257} ta{\u176} {Na}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}{\u257}laye] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}{\u257}laya{\u7747} {Ed}}

\par par{\u257}rdhaparako{\u7789}{\u299}n{\u257}{\u7747} p{\u363}rvasy{\u257}{\u7747} di{\u347}am {\u257}{\u347}rit{\u257}{\u7717}||2.27||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27d {\b di{\u347}a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; di{\u347}i{\u176} {Nb}}

\par bhinn{\u257}{\u241}janaprabh{\u257}{\u7717} sarve dak{\u7779}i{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} di{\u347}am {\u257}{\u347}rit{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28a {\b {\u176}prabh{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}prabh{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28b {\b dak{\u7779}i{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; dak{\u7779}i{\u7751}a{\u176} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b di{\u347}am] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; di{\u347}im {Cb}{Ed}}

\par par{\u257}rdhaparako{\u7789}{\u299}n{\u257}m aghor{\u257}layam {\u257}{\u347}rit{\u257}{\u7717}||2.28||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28d {\b {\u176}ghor{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}dhor{\u257}{\u176} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}{\u347}rit{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}{\u347}rit{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the Ai{\u347}a form <i>di{\u347}i{\u7747}</i> in <ms>C<sub>45</sub></ms>.}

\par kundenduhima{\u347}ail{\u257}bh{\u257}{\u7717} pa{\u347}cim{\u257}{\u7747} di{\u347}am {\u257}{\u347}rit{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }29b {\b pa{\u347}cim{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; pa{\u347}cim{\u257} {Cb}{\u8226}

                 {\b di{\u347}a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; di{\u347}i{\u176} {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}{\u347}rit{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}{\u347}rit{\u257} {Ed}}

\par par{\u257}rdhaparako{\u7789}{\u299}n{\u257}{\u7747} sadyami{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}laya{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}||2.29||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }29d {\b sadyami{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sadyami{\u7779}{\u7789}v{\u257}{\u176} {Na}{\u8226}

                 {\b sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sm{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7717} {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the Ai{\u347}a form <i>di{\u347}i{\u7747}</i> in <ms>K<sub>07</sub></ms> in p{\u257}da b.
                In p{\u257}da d, we may suppose the presence of a sandhi-bridge:
                <i>sadya-m-i{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257}laya{\u7717}</i>.}

\par ku{\u7749}kumodakasa{\u7747}k{\u257}{\u347}{\u257} uttar{\u257}{\u7747} di{\u347}am {\u257}{\u347}rit{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }30b {\b uttar{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; uttar{\u257} {Cb}{\u8226}

                 {\b di{\u347}am] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; di{\u347}im {Ca}}

\par par{\u257}rdhaparakot{\u299}n{\u257}{\u7747} v{\u257}madev{\u257}laya{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}||2.30||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }30d {\b {\u176}laya{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}laya {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the Ai{\u347}a form <i>di{\u347}i{\u7747}</i> in <ms>C<sub>95</sub></ms> in p{\u257}da b.}

\par {\u299}{\u347}{\u257}nasya kal{\u257}{\u7717} pa{\u241}ca vaktrasy{\u257}pi catu{\u7779} kal{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }31a {\b kal{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; kal{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }31b {\b catu{\u7779} kal{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; catu{\u7779}take {Ed}}

\par aghorasya kal{\u257} a{\u7779}{\u7789}au v{\u257}madev{\u257}s trayoda{\u347}a||2.31||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }31d {\b v{\u257}madev{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; v{\u257}madeva{\u176} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note how <i>vaktrasya</i> should refer to Śiva's Tatpuru{\u7779}a-face, 
                given that the text lists Śiva's five faces: Ī{\u347}{\u257}na, Tatpuru{\u7779}a, Aghora, V{\u257}madeva, Sadyoj{\u257}ta.}

\par sadya{\u347} c{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}au kal{\u257} j{\u241}ey{\u257}{\u7717} sa{\u7747}s{\u257}r{\u257}r{\u7751}avat{\u257}rak{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32a {\b j{\u241}ey{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; j{\u241}ey{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32b {\b sa{\u7747}s{\u257}r{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}<corr>pc</corr>{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sa{\u7747}s{\u257}{\u176} {Cb}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par a{\u7779}{\u7789}atri{\u7747}{\u347}at kal{\u257} hy et{\u257}{\u7717} k{\u299}rtit{\u257} dvijasattama||2.32||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32c {\b {\u176}tri{\u7747}{\u347}at ka{\u176}] }  {\i corr. }; {\u176}tri{\u7747}{\u347}aka{\u176} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b hy et{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; j{\u241}ey{\u257}{\u7717} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32d {\b {\u176}sattama] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}sattama{\u7717} {Nb}{Ed}}

\par sa{\u7747}khy{\u257} var{\u7751}{\u257} di{\u347}a{\u347} caiva ekaikasya p{\u7771}thak p{\u7771}thak|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33a {\b sa{\u7747}khy{\u257} var{\u7751}{\u257}] }  {Cb}{Nc}; sa{\u7747}khy{\u257} var{\u7751}{\u7751}o {Ca}{Nb}, sa{\u7747}khy{\u257} va{\u7751}{\u7751}{\u257} {Na}, sa{\u7747}dhy{\u257} var{\u7751}{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33b {\b ekaikasya] }  {Ca}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; aikaikasya {Cb}{Na}}

\par p{\u363}rvoktena vidh{\u257}nena bodhavy{\u257}s tattvacintakai{\u7717}||2.33||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33d {\b bodhavy{\u257}s ta{\u176}] }  {\i eme. }; bodhavy{\u257} ta{\u176} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}}

\par {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}agaman{\u257}k{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7789}y{\u257} {\u347}ivayoga{\u7747} sad{\u257}bhyaset|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34a {\b {\u176}k{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7789}y{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Ed}; k{\u7771}{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u257} {Na}{Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34b {\b yoga{\u7747} sad{\u257}bhyaset] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; yoga samabhyaset {Nb}}

\par {\u347}ivayoga{\u7747} vin{\u257} vipra tatra gantu{\u7747} na {\u347}akyate||2.34||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34c {\b {\u176}yoga{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}yoga {Ed}}

\par a{\u347}vamedh{\u257}diyaj{\u241}{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} ko{\u7789}y{\u257}yuta{\u347}at{\u257}ni ca|

\par k{\u7771}cchr{\u257}ditapa sarv{\u257}{\u7751}i k{\u7771}tv{\u257} kalpa{\u347}at{\u257}ni ca|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35c {\b {\u176}tapa] }  {Ed}; {\u176}tapa{\u7717} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>)}

\par tatra gantu{\u7747} na {\u347}akyeta devair api tapodhana||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35e {\b {\u347}akyeta] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u347}akyaita {Cb}, {\u347}akyete {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35f {\b devai{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; deve{\u176} {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}dhana] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}dhanam {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Understand <SKT>k{\u7771}cchr{\u257}ditapa sarv{\u257}{\u7751}i</SKT> as <SKT>k{\u7771}cchr{\u257}ditap{\u257}{\u7747}si sarv{\u257}{\u7751}i</SKT>.}

\par ga{\u7749}g{\u257}disarvat{\u299}rthe{\u7779}u sn{\u257}tv{\u257} taptv{\u257} ca vai puna{\u7717}|

\par tatra gantu{\u7747} na {\u347}akyeta {\u7771}{\u7779}ibhir v{\u257} mah{\u257}tmabhi{\u7717}||2.36||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }36a {\b gantu{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; gantu {Nb}{Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u347}akyeta] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u347}akyante {Ed}}

\par saptadv{\u299}pasamudr{\u257}{\u7751}i ratnap{\u363}r{\u7751}{\u257}ni bho dvija|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }37a {\b {\u176}dv{\u299}pa{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}d{\u299}pa{\u176} {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}samudr{\u257}{\u7751}i] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}samudr{\u257}ya {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }37 <SKT>Cf. ŚDhU 2.104: </SKT> tri{\u7717} pradatv{\u257} mah{\u299}{\u7747} p{\u363}r{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747}<SKT>...</SKT>}

\par dattv{\u257} v{\u257} vedavidu{\u7779}e {\u347}raddh{\u257}bhaktisamanvita{\u7717}|

\par tatra gantu{\u7747} na {\u347}akyeta vin{\u257} dhy{\u257}nena ni{\u347}caya{\u7717}||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }37c {\b gantu{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; gantu {Nb}, ga{\u7747}ntu {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u347}akyeta] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u347}akyante {Ed}}

\par svadeh{\u257}n m{\u257}{\u7747}sam uddh{\u7771}tya dattv{\u257}rthibhya{\u347} ca ni{\u347}cay{\u257}t|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38a {\b svadeh{\u257}n m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}; svadeh{\u257}t m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u176} {Nc}, svadeh{\u257}tm{\u257}{\u7747} sa{\u176} {Ed}}

\par svad{\u257}raputrasarvasva{\u7747} {\u347}iro 'rthibhya{\u347} ca yo dadet|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38a {\b {\u176}sva{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}sva {Nb}}

\par na tatra gantu{\u7747} {\u347}akyeta anyair v{\u257}pi sudu{\u7779}karai{\u7717}||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38e {\b na tatra gantu{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; na tatra gantu{\u7747} na {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38f {\b {\u176}du{\u7779}karai{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}du{\u7779}k{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Nb}}

\par yaj{\u241}at{\u299}rthatapod{\u257}naved{\u257}dhyayanap{\u257}raga{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }39c {\b {\u176}d{\u257}na{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}d{\u257}na{\u7747} {Na}, {\u176}d{\u257}nai {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }39d {\b {\u176}p{\u257}raga{\u7717}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}p{\u257}rag{\u257}{\u7717} {Ca}{Nb}}

\par brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}ntasya bhog{\u257}{\u7747}s tu bhu{\u7749}kte k{\u257}lava{\u347}{\u257}nuga{\u7717}||2.39||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }39a {\b brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}ntasya bhog{\u257}{\u7747}s tu] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; 

                                        brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}ntasya bhog{\u257}s tu {Nb},

                                        brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}{\u257}t tasya bhog{\u257}s tu {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }39b {\b bhu{\u7749}kte] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}; {\u8768}bhu{\u7749}kte{\u8768} {Nc}, bhuktv{\u257} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}ga{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}g{\u257}{\u7717} {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par k{\u257}lena samapre{\u7779}ye{\u7751}a dharmo y{\u257}ti parik{\u7779}ayam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }40b {\b dharmo] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; dharme {Nc}}

\par al{\u257}tacakravat sarva{\u7747} k{\u257}lo y{\u257}ti paribhraman|

\par traik{\u257}lyakalan{\u257}t k{\u257}las tena k{\u257}la{\u7717} prak{\u299}rtita{\u7717}||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }40e {\b {\u176}kalan{\u257}t k{\u257}la{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}kalan{\u257} k{\u257}la{\u176} {Nb}}

<TEXT> \par ||iti v{\u7771}{\u7779}as{\u257}rasa{\u7747}grahe {\u347}iv{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}asa{\u7747}khy{\u257} n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}yo dvit{\u299}ya{\u7717}||\par

        {\footnote {\chftn ) } <SKT>\Colo:</SKT> {\b n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}yo dvit{\u299}ya{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc};

                                                                n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}ya dvit{\u299}ya{\u7717} {Nb},

                                                                n{\u257}ma dvit{\u299}yo 'dhy{\u257}ya{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par[ Chapter 3  ]\par
\par{\b [  t{\u7771}t{\u299}yo 'dhy{\u257}ya{\u7717} 
 ]}
\par{\b [  dharmapravacanam 
 ]}
\par vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca| 

\par kimartha{\u7747} dharmam ity {\u257}hu{\u7717} katim{\u363}rti{\u347} ca k{\u299}rtyate|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }1a {\b {\u257}hu{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u257}hu {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }For the correct interpretation of <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> a, namely to decide whether these questions
                focus on the bull of Dharma or Dharma itself/himself, see 
                the end of the previous chapter, where <SKT>dharma</SKT> was mentioned (2.40b),
                and to which the present verse is a reaction; and also
                MBh 12.110.10-11:
                <sep/>
                <SKT>prabh{\u257}v{\u257}rth{\u257}ya bh{\u363}t{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} dharmapravacana{\u7747} k{\u7771}tam|<br/>
                 yat sy{\u257}d ahi{\u7747}s{\u257}sa{\u7747}yukta{\u7747} sa dharma iti ni{\u347}caya{\u7717}||<br/>
                 dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}{\u257}d dharma ity {\u257}hur dharme{\u7751}a vidh{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7717} praj{\u257}{\u7717}|<br/>
                 yat sy{\u257}d dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}asa{\u7747}yukta{\u7747} sa dharma iti ni{\u347}caya{\u7717}||</SKT>
                <sep/>
                Note the similarities with this chapter: the phrase <SKT>dharma ity {\u257}hur</SKT>,
                the fact that the present chapter from verse 18 on is actually a chapter on <SKT>ahi{\u7747}s{\u257}</SKT>,
                and that the etimological explanation involves the word [<SKT>{\u257}</SKT>]<SKT>dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}a</SKT> in
                both cases. These lead me to think that in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s ab of this verse in the VSS,
                it is Dharma that is the focus of the inquiry and not the bull.}

\par katip{\u257}dav{\u7771}{\u7779}o j{\u241}eyo gatis tasya kati sm{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7717}||3.1||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }1d {\b sm{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; sm{\u7771}t{\u257} {Cb}, sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }1<SKT>Testimonia for this chapter: {Ca}\ ff.\thinspace 197r-198v, 

                                             {Cb}\ ff.\thinspace 204v-206r, 

                                             {Cc}\ ff.\thinspace 273r-273v (it broke off at 2.21 and resumes at 3.30b; f. 272 is missing),

                                             {Na}\ ff.\thinspace 4v-6r, 

                                             {Nb}\ exp.\thinspace 42, 47-48 (sic!),

                                             {Nc}\ ff.\thinspace 213r-214v;

                                {C}\ = {Ca} + {Cb} + {Cc} </SKT>}

               {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Understand <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d as <SKT>gatayas tasya kati sm{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT>. I have accepted
                        <SKT>sm{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT> because this plural signals that <SKT>gatis</SKT> is meant to be plural,
                        similarly to what happens in 3.6cd (<SKT>tasya patn{\u299}... mah{\u257}bh{\u257}g{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT>).}

\par kaut{\u363}hala{\u7747} mamotpanna{\u7747} sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7747} chindhi tattvata{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }2a {\b kaut{\u363}hala{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; kautuhala {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b mamotpanna{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; samotpanna{\u7747} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }2b {\b sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7747}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sa{\u347}aya{\u7747} {Ca}}

\par kasya putro muni{\u347}re{\u7779}{\u7789}ha praj{\u257}s tasya kati sm{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7717}||3.2||

\par anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca| 

\par dh{\u7771}tir ity e{\u7779}a dh{\u257}tur vai pary{\u257}ya{\u7717} parik{\u299}rtita{\u7717}|

\par {\u257}dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}{\u257}n mahattv{\u257}c ca dharma ity abhidh{\u299}yate||3.3|| 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }3c {\b {\u257}dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}{\u257}n ma{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Nb}; {\u257}dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}{\u257}t pa{\u176} {Cb}, {\u257}dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}{\u257}t ma{\u176} {Na}{Nc}, {\u257}dh{\u257}re{\u7751}a ma{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }3d {\b {\u176}bhidh{\u299}yate] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}vidh{\u299}yate {Cb}{Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }3\ ≈\ <SKT>Matsyapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 145.27: </SKT>  dharmeti dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}e dh{\u257}tur mahatve caiva ucyate|

                                                  {\u257}dh{\u257}ra{\u7751}e mahattve v{\u257} dharma{\u7717} sa tu nirucyate|}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }On a non-verbal stem being a <SKT>dh{\u257}tu</SKT>, see e.g. 
                                                V{\u257}yupur{\u257}{\u7751}a 3.17cd:
                        <SKT>bh{\u257}vya ity e{\u7779}a dh{\u257}tur vai bh{\u257}vye k{\u257}le vibh{\u257}vyate</SKT>;
                                                V{\u257}yupur{\u257}{\u7751}a 3.19cd (= Brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}apur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.38.21ab):
                        <SKT>n{\u257}tha ity e{\u7779}a dh{\u257}tur vai dh{\u257}tuj{\u241}ai{\u7717} p{\u257}lane sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}</SKT>;
                                                Li{\u7749}gapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 2.9.19:
                        <SKT>bhaja ity e{\u7779}a dh{\u257}tur vai sev{\u257}y{\u257}{\u7747} parik{\u299}rtita{\u7717}</SKT>; etc.}

\par {\u347}rutism{\u7771}tidvayor m{\u363}rti{\u347} catu{\u7779}p{\u257}dav{\u7771}{\u7779}a{\u7717} sthita{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }4ab {\b {\u176}sm{\u7771}tidvayor m{\u363}rti{\u347} ca{\u176}] }  {Ca}; {\u176}sm{\u7771}tidvayo m{\u363}rtti{\u347} ca{\u176} {Cb}{Nb}, {\u176}sm{\u7771}tidvayo m{\u363}rtti ca{\u176} {Na}{Nc}, 

                                                                        {\u176}sm{\u7771}tir dvayo m{\u363}rti{\u347} ca {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }4b {\b {\u176}v{\u7771}{\u7779}a{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}v{\u7771}{\u7779}a {Nc}}

\par catur{\u257}{\u347}rama yo dharma{\u7717} k{\u299}rtit{\u257}ni man{\u299}{\u7779}ibhi{\u7717}||3.4||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }4c {\b catur{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; c{\u257}tur{\u257}{\u176} {Ca}{Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }A similar image of the legs of the Bull of Dharma being the four <SKT>{\u257}{\u347}rama</SKT>s 
                is hinted at MBh 12.262.19-21: 
                <sep/>
                    <SKT>dharmam{ }eka{\u7747} catu{\u7779}p{\u257}dam{ }{\u257}{\u347}rit{\u257}s{ }te narar{\u7779}abh{\u257}{\u7717}|
               <br/>ta{\u7747} santo vidhivat{ }pr{\u257}pya gacchanti param{\u257}{\u7747} gatim||
               <br/>g{\u7771}hebhya eva ni{\u7779}kramya vanam{ }anye sam{\u257}{\u347}rit{\u257}{\u7717}|
               <br/>g{\u7771}ham{ }ev{\u257}bhisa{\u7747}{\u347}ritya tato 'nye brahmac{\u257}ri{\u7751}a{\u7717}||
               <br/>dharmam{ }eta{\u7747} catu{\u7779}p{\u257}dam{ }{\u257}{\u347}rama{\u7747} br{\u257}hma{\u7751}{\u257} vidu{\u7717}|
               <br/>{\u257}nantya{\u7747} brahma{\u7751}a{\u7717} sth{\u257}na{\u7747} br{\u257}hma{\u7751}{\u257} n{\u257}ma ni{\u347}caya{\u7717}||</SKT>
        <sep/>
        On the more frequently quoted interpretation of the four legs, see Olivelle `Ā{\u347}rama', 235:
        ``Dharma and truth possess all four feet and are whole during the K{\u7771}ta yuga, 
        and people did not obtain anything unrighteously (<SKT>adharme{\u7751}a</SKT>). 
        By obtaining, however, <SKT>dharma</SKT> has lost one foot during each of the other <SKT>yuga</SKT>s 
        and righteousness (<SKT>dharma</SKT>) likewise has diminished by one quarter due to theft, 
        falsehood, and deceit. (MDh 1.81-82)''
        <sep/>
        Understand <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s c and d as <SKT>catv{\u257}ri {\u257}{\u347}ram{\u257}{\u7751}i k{\u299}rtit{\u257}ni dharmo man{\u299}{\u7779}ibhi{\u7717}</SKT> or
                <SKT>yo dharma{\u7717} k{\u299}rtita{\u347} catur{\u257}{\u347}ram{\u257}{\u7751}i man{\u299}{\u7779}ibhi{\u7717}</SKT> or 
                <SKT>yo dharma{\u347} catur{\u257}{\u347}rama{\u7717} k{\u299}rtito man{\u299}{\u7779}ibhi{\u7717}</SKT>.}

\par gati{\u347} ca pa{\u241}ca vij{\u241}ey{\u257}{\u7717} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u dharmasya bho dvija|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }5a {\b vij{\u241}ey{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {\i eme. }; vij{\u241}eya{\u7717} {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}, {\i omitted in }\ {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }5 <SKT>{Cb}\ reads here </SKT> gati{\u347} ca pautr{\u257}{\u347} ca anek{\u257}{\u347} ca babh{\u363}va ha,

                        <SKT>skipping to 3.7cd, omitting 3.5-7ab.</SKT>}

\par devam{\u257}nu{\u7779}atirya{\u7747} ca narakasth{\u257}var{\u257}daya{\u7717}||3.5||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Understand <SKT>gati{\u347}</SKT> as <SKT>gataya{\u347}</SKT> and note that <SKT>vij{\u241}ey{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT> is an emendation from
                <SKT>vij{\u241}eya{\u7717}</SKT> following the logic of 3.1d. 
                <SKT>tirya</SKT> seems to be an acceptable nominal stem in this text for <SKT>tirya{\u241}c</SKT>. See
                e.g. 4.6a: <SKT>devam{\u257}nu{\u7779}atirye{\u7779}u</SKT>.  <SKT>{\u176}{\u257}daya{\u7717}</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d seems superfluous.}

\par brahma{\u7751}o h{\u7771}daya{\u7747} bhittv{\u257} j{\u257}to dharma{\u7717} san{\u257}tana{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6a {\b brahma{\u7751}o] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\i omitted in }\ {Cb}, br{\u257}hma{\u7751}o {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b bhittv{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; vittv{\u257} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6b {\b dharma{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; dharma {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }6 <SKT>cf.\ Dev{\u299}pur{\u257}{\u7751}a 4.59cd: </SKT> brahma{\u7751}o h{\u7771}day{\u257}j j{\u257}ta{\u7717} putro dharma iti sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {\u8226} 

                    <SKT>cf. also MBh 1.60.40ab: </SKT> brahma{\u7751}o h{\u7771}daya{\u7747} bhittv{\u257} ni{\u7717}s{\u7771}to bhagav{\u257}n bh{\u7771}gu{\u7717}}

\par tasya patn{\u299} mah{\u257}bh{\u257}g{\u257} trayoda{\u347}a sumadhyam{\u257}{\u7717}||3.6||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }6d {\b {\u176}madhyam{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\i omitted in }\ {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the use of the singular in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s c and d. I have left <SKT>sumadhyam{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT> as the
        manuscripts transmit it: it signals the presence of the plural. And consider 
        correcting <SKT>mah{\u257}bh{\u257}g{\u257}</SKT> to <SKT>mah{\u257}bh{\u257}g{\u257}s</SKT>. In sum, 
                understand <SKT>tasya patnyo mah{\u257}bh{\u257}g{\u257}s trayoda{\u347}a sumadhyam{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT>.}

\par dak{\u7779}akany{\u257} vi{\u347}{\u257}l{\u257}k{\u7779}{\u299} {\u347}raddh{\u257}dy{\u257}{\u7717} sumanohar{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }7a {\b {\u176}{\u257}k{\u7779}{\u299}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\i omitted in }\ {Cb}, {\u176}{\u257}k{\u7779}i {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }7b {\b {\u176}{\u257}dy{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {\i eme. }; {\u176}{\u257}dy{\u257} {Nb}{Nc}{Ed}, {\u176}{\u257}{\u7693}hy{\u257}{\u7717} {Na}, {\i omitted in }\ {Cb}, {\u176}{\u257}{\u7693}hy{\u257} {Ca}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}har{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}har{\u257} {Ca}{Nc},  {\i omitted in }\ {Cb}, {\u176}¤{\u8768}m{\u257}{\u8768}{\u7717} {Na}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }<SKT>{\u347}raddh{\u257}{\u7693}hy{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> b is an attractive lectio difficilior (`they were rich in faith/devotion'), but I have finally 
                decided to accept the easier and better-attested <SKT>{\u347}raddh{\u257}dy{\u257}</SKT>[<SKT>{\u7717}</SKT>].}

\par tasya putr{\u257}{\u347} ca pautr{\u257}{\u347} ca anek{\u257}{\u347} ca babh{\u363}va ha|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }7cd {\b tasya putr{\u257}{\u347} ca pautr{\u257}{\u347} ca anek{\u257}{\u347} ca babh{\u363}va ha] }  {Ca}{Nb};

                gati{\u347} ca pautr{\u257}{\u347} ca anek{\u257}{\u347} ca babh{\u363}va ha <EYESKIP>from 3.5a</EYESKIP> {Cb},

                tasya putr{\u257}{\u347} ca yotr{\u257}{\u347} ca anek{\u257}{\u347} ca babh{\u363}va ha {Na}{Nc},

                tasya putr{\u257} anek{\u257}{\u347} ca tath{\u257} pautr{\u257} babh{\u363}vaha{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par e{\u7779}a dharmanisargo 'ya{\u7747} ki{\u7747} bh{\u363}ya{\u7717} {\u347}rotum icchasi||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Again, I have chosen/applied the plural forms <SKT>{\u176}{\u257}dy{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT> and <SKT>sumanohar{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> b to hint at the fact
                        that the presence of the plural is to be preferred here; thus only <SKT>vi{\u347}{\u257}l{\u257}k{\u7779}{\u299}</SKT> is 
                        problematic. As <SKT>patn{\u299}</SKT> in the previous verse, it should be treated as a plural.
        Note the use of the singular for the plural also in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s cd, especially <SKT>babh{\u363}va ha</SKT> for <SKT>babh{\u363}vu{\u7717}</SKT>. 
        <sep/>
        MMW on Dak{\u7779}a:
        ``daughters of whom 27 become the Moon's wives, forming the lunar asterisms, and 13 
        [or 17 BhP.; or 8 R.] those of Ka{\u347}yapa, becoming by this latter the mothers 
        of gods, demons, men, and animals, while 10 are married to Dharma, Mn. ix, 128f.'' CHECK}

\par vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca| 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }8 {\b vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca] }  {Cb}{Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc}{Ed}; vigatar{\u257}ga u {Ca}{Nb}, {\i omitted in }\ {Na}<corr>ac</corr>}

\par dharmapatn{\u299} vi{\u347}e{\u7779}e{\u7751}a putras tebhya{\u7717} p{\u7771}thak p{\u7771}thak|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Consider emending <SKT>tebhya{\u7717}</SKT> to the correct feminine form <SKT>t{\u257}bhya{\u7717}</SKT>.
                Note again the use of the singular (nominative) for the plural (accusative) in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s ab.
                Alternatively, emend <SKT>dharmapatn{\u299}</SKT> to <SKT>dharmapatn{\u299}r</SKT> (plural accusative) and 
                <SKT>putras</SKT> to <SKT>putr{\u257}n</SKT> to make them work with <SKT>{\u347}rotum icch{\u257}mi</SKT>.}

\par {\u347}rotum icch{\u257}mi tattvena kathayasva tapodhana||3.8||

\par anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca| 

\par {\u347}raddh{\u257} lak{\u7779}m{\u299}r dh{\u7771}tis tu{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7717} pu{\u7779}{\u7789}ir medh{\u257} kriy{\u257} lajj{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9a {\b lak{\u7779}m{\u299}r dh{\u7771}tis tu{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7717}] }  {Ca}; 

                                lak{\u7779}m{\u299}r dh{\u7771}tis tu{\u7779} {Cb},  

                                lak{\u7779}m{\u299} ddh{\u7771}tir ddh{\u7771}tis tu{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7717} {Na}<corr>ac</corr>, 

                                lak{\u7779}m{\u299}r ddh{\u7771}tis tu{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7717} {Na}<corr>pc</corr>, 

                                lak{\u7779}m{\u299}{\u7747} dh{\u7771}ti tu{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7717} {Nb},

                                lak{\u7779}m{\u299} dh{\u7771}tis tu{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7717} {Nc},

                                lak{\u7779}m{\u299} dh{\u7771}tis tu{\u7779}{\u7789}{\u299} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9b {\b pu{\u7779}{\u7789}ir me{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; pu{\u7779}{\u7789}i me{\u176} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b lajj{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; laj{\u257} {Na}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }For Dharma's thirteen wives and their sons, see Li{\u7749}gapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.5.34-37 (note the 
                       similarity between the first line and VSS 3.6cd-7ab above):
        <sep/>
        <SKT>dharmasya patnya{\u7717} {\u347}raddh{\u257}dy{\u257}{\u7717} k{\u299}rtit{\u257} vai trayoda{\u347}a|
        <br/>t{\u257}su dharmapraj{\u257}{\u7747} vak{\u7779}ye yath{\u257}kramam{ }anuttamam||
        <br/>k{\u257}mo darpo 'tha niyama{\u7717} sa{\u7747}to{\u7779}o lobha eva ca|
        <br/>{\u347}rutas{ }tu da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7717} samayo bodha{\u347}{ }caiva mah{\u257}dyuti{\u7717}||
        <br/>apram{\u257}da{\u347}{ }ca vinayo vyavas{\u257}yo dvijottam{\u257}{\u7717}|
        <br/>k{\u7779}ema{\u7747} sukha{\u7747} ya{\u347}a{\u347}{ }caiva dharmaputr{\u257}{\u347}{ }ca t{\u257}su vai|| 
        <br/>dharmasya vai kriy{\u257}y{\u257}{\u7747} tu da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7717} samaya eva ca|
        <br/>apram{\u257}das{ }tath{\u257} bodho buddher{ }dharmasya tau sutau||</SKT>
        }

\par buddhi{\u7717} {\u347}{\u257}ntir vapu{\u7717} k{\u299}rti{\u7717} siddhi{\u7717} pras{\u363}tisambhav{\u257}{\u7717}||3.9||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9c {\b buddhi{\u7717}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; buddhi {Ca}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }9d {\b siddhi{\u7717} pras{\u363}tisambhav{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {\i conj. }; siddhi{\u347} c{\u257}bh{\u363}tisambhav{\u257} {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}, 

                                        siddhi{\u347} c{\u257}tisambhav{\u257} {Cb}, siddhi{\u347} ca bh{\u363}tisambhav{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }<sep/><SKT>pras{\u363}tisambhav{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT> is a rather bold conjecture that can be supported by two facts:
                        firstly, the readings of the manuscripts are difficult to make sense of and thus are
                                         probably corrupt; secondly, a corruption from the name Pras{\u363}ti, that of Dak{\u7779}a's wife, to <SKT>{\u257}bh{\u363}ti</SKT>
                                         is relatively easily to explain, <SKT>s{\u363}</SKT> and <SKT>bh{\u363}</SKT> being close enough in some scripts 
                                         (e.g. in {Ca}) to cause confusion. Another option would be to accept 
                                         Ābh{\u363}ti as the name of Dak{\u7779}a's wife.
                <sep/>
                For Pras{\u363}ti being Dak{\u7779}a's wife in other sources,
                         see e.g. Li{\u7749}gapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.5.20-21 (but also note the presence of the name Sambh{\u363}ti...):
                               <SKT>pras{\u363}ti{\u7717} su{\u7779}uve dak{\u7779}{\u257}c{ }caturvi{\u7747}{\u347}atikanyak{\u257}{\u7717}|
                                {\u347}raddh{\u257}{\u7747} lak{\u7779}m{\u299}{\u7747} dh{\u7771}ti{\u7747} pu{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7747} tu{\u7779}{\u7789}i{\u7747} medh{\u257}{\u7747} kriy{\u257}{\u7747} tath{\u257}||
                                buddhi lajj{\u257}{\u7747} vapu{\u7717} {\u347}{\u257}nti{\u7747} siddhi{\u7747} k{\u299}rti{\u7747} mah{\u257}tap{\u257}{\u7717}|
                                khy{\u257}ti{\u7747} {\u347}{\u257}nti{\u347}{ }ca sa{\u7747}bh{\u363}ti{\u7747} sm{\u7771}ti{\u7747} pr{\u299}ti{\u7747} k{\u7779}am{\u257}{\u7747} tath{\u257}||</SKT>}

\par {\u347}raddh{\u257} k{\u257}ma{\u7717} suto j{\u257}to darpo lak{\u7779}m{\u299}suta{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }10a {\b k{\u257}ma{\u7717}] }  {Na}; k{\u257}ma{\u176} {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}, dharma{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Understand <SKT>{\u347}raddh{\u257}</SKT> as a stem form noun for <SKT>{\u347}raddh{\u257}y{\u257}{\u7717}</SKT> (gen./abl.).}

\par dh{\u7771}ty{\u257}s tu niyama{\u7717} putra{\u7717} sa{\u7747}to{\u7779}as tu{\u7779}{\u7789}ija{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}||3.10||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }10 <SKT>For 3.10-13, see a rather similar 

        passage e.g.\ in K{\u363}rmapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.8.20 ff.: </SKT>

        {\u347}raddh{\u257}y{\u257} {\u257}tmaja{\u7717} k{\u257}mo darpo lak{\u7779}m{\u299}suta{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|

        dh{\u7771}ty{\u257}s tu niyama{\u7717} putras tu{\u7779}{\u7789}y{\u257}{\u7717} sa{\u7747}to{\u7779}a ucyate|| 

        pu{\u7779}{\u7789}y{\u257} l{\u257}bha{\u7717} suta{\u347} c{\u257}pi medh{\u257}putra{\u7717} {\u347}rutas tath{\u257}| 

        kriy{\u257}y{\u257}{\u347} c{\u257}bhavat putro da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7717} samaya eva ca||  

        buddhy{\u257} bodha{\u7717} sutas tadvad apram{\u257}do vyaj{\u257}yata| 

        lajj{\u257}y{\u257} vinaya{\u7717} putro vapu{\u7779}o vyavas{\u257}yaka{\u7717}||  

        k{\u7779}ema{\u7717} {\u347}{\u257}ntisuta{\u347} c{\u257}pi sukha{\u7747} siddhir aj{\u257}yata|

        ya{\u347}a{\u7717} k{\u299}rtisutas tadvad ity ete dharmas{\u363}nava{\u7717}||   

        k{\u257}masya har{\u7779}a{\u7717} putro 'bh{\u363}d dev{\u257}nando vyaj{\u257}yata|  

        ity e{\u7779}a vai sukhodarka{\u7717} sargo dharmasya k{\u299}rtita{\u7717}||}

\par pu{\u7779}{\u7789}y{\u257} l{\u257}bha{\u7717} suto j{\u257}to medh{\u257}putra{\u7717} {\u347}rutas tath{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11a {\b l{\u257}bha{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}; l{\u257}bha{\u176} {Na}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11b {\b {\u176}putra{\u7717}] }  {\i eme. }; {\u176}putra {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u347}ruta{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u347}rata{\u176} {Cb}}

\par kriy{\u257}y{\u257}s tv abhaya{\u7717} putro da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7717} samaya eva ca||3.11||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11c {\b tv abhaya{\u7717} putro] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; t{\u363}bhaya{\u7717} putrau {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }11d {\b da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7717}] }  {\i corr. }; da{\u7751}{\u7693}e {Ca}{Na}<corr>ac</corr>, da{\u7751}{\u7693}o {Cb}, da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u176} {Na}<corr>pc</corr>{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b ca] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; tu {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }It is tempting to emend <SKT>abhaya{\u7717}</SKT> to <SKT>ubhaya{\u7717}</SKT>, thus matching the relevant line in the K{\u363}rmapur{\u257}{\u7751}a cited above:
                        <SKT>kriy{\u257}y{\u257}{\u347} c{\u257}bhavat putro da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7717} samaya eva ca</SKT> and allotting only two sons to Kriy{\u257}, but
                        in a number of sources Kriy{\u257} actually has three sons, see e.g. Vi{\u7779}{\u7751}upur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.7.29(ab? CHECK in book),
                        where they are named as Da{\u7751}{\u7693}a, Naya and Vinaya:
                                <SKT>medh{\u257} {\u347}ruta{\u7747} kriy{\u257} da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7747} naya{\u7747} vinayam eva ca</SKT>. 
                        Perhaps read <SKT>kriy{\u257}y{\u257}s tu naya{\u7717} putro</SKT> in p{\u257}da c? Compare V{\u257}yupur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.10.34cd
                                        <SKT>kriy{\u257}y{\u257}s tu naya{\u7717} prokto da{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u7717} samaya eva ca</SKT> 
                                with Brahm{\u257}{\u7751}{\u7693}apur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.9.60ab:
                                        <SKT>kriy{\u257}y{\u257}s tanayau proktau dama{\u347} ca {\u347}ama eva ca</SKT>}

\par lajj{\u257}y{\u257} vinaya{\u7717} putro buddhy{\u257} bodha{\u7717} suta{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12a {\b lajj{\u257}y{\u257} vinaya{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; lajj{\u257}y{\u257}{\u7717} vinaya{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12b {\b suta{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}] }  {Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; suta{\u7717} ¤¤ {Ca}, suta{\u7717}s tath{\u257} {Cb}}

\par lajj{\u257}y{\u257}{\u7717} sudhiya{\u7717} putra apram{\u257}da{\u347} ca t{\u257}v ubhau||3.12||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12c {\b sudhiya{\u7717}] }  {Ed}; sudhiya {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b putra] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; putra{\u7717} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }12d {\b apram{\u257}da{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; apram{\u257}d{\u257}{\u176} {Na}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }In a very similar passages in K{\u363}rmapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 1.8.20 ff., Apram{\u257}da is Buddhi's son and 
                 Lajj{\u257} has only one son, Vinaya. In the above verse (VSS 3.12), <SKT>sudhiya{\u7717}</SKT> (for <SKT>sudh{\u299}{\u7717}</SKT>) may only be 
                        qualifying <SKT>apram{\u257}da</SKT>, thus Lajj{\u257} may have two sons: Vinaya and the wise Apram{\u257}da.}

\par k{\u7779}ema{\u7717} {\u347}{\u257}ntisuto vindy{\u257}d vyavas{\u257}yo vapo{\u7717} suta{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13b {\b vapo{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; vapo {Na}}

\par ya{\u347}a{\u7717} k{\u299}rtisuto j{\u241}eya{\u7717} sukha{\u7747} siddher vyaj{\u257}yata|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13d {\b siddhe{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}; siddhi {Ca}{Nc}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b vyaj{\u257}yata] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}; vyaj{\u257}yate {Nb}{Ed}, vyaj{\u257}yata{\u7717} {Nc}}

\par sv{\u257}yambhuve 'ntare tv {\u257}san k{\u299}rtit{\u257} dharmas{\u363}nava{\u7717}||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }13e {\b sv{\u257}yambhuve] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nc}; sv{\u257}yambhuvo {Cb}, svayambhuve {Nb}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b 'ntare tv {\u257}san] }  {\i conj. }; 'ntare tv{\u257}si {Ca}{Cb}{Na}, 

                                'ntare tv {\u257}s{\u299}t {Nb}, 'ntare tv {\u257}sa{\u7747} {Nc}, 'ntar ev{\u257}si {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note that <SKT>sukha{\u7747}</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d is probably meant to be masculine (<SKT>sukha{\u7717}</SKT>), but e.g. in the 
                K{\u363}rmapur{\u257}{\u7751}a passage quoted above it is also neuter. For the emendation in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> e, 
                see Matsyapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 9.2cd: 
                                      <SKT>y{\u257}m{\u257} n{\u257}ma pur{\u257} dev{\u257} {\u257}san sv{\u257}yambhuv{\u257}ntare</SKT>
                and Bh{\u257}gavatapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 6.4.1:      
                                      <SKT>dev{\u257}suran{\u7771}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} sargo n{\u257}g{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} m{\u7771}gapak{\u7779}i{\u7751}{\u257}m|
                                      s{\u257}m{\u257}sikas tvay{\u257} prokto yas tu sv{\u257}yambhuve 'ntare||</SKT>.}

\par vigatar{\u257}ga uv{\u257}ca| 

\par m{\u363}rtidvaya{\u7747} katha{\u7747} dharma{\u7747} kathayasva tapodhana|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14a {\b dharma{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}; ddharma {Nc}, dharma{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par kaut{\u363}halam at{\u299}va{\u7747} me kartaya j{\u241}{\u257}nasa{\u7747}{\u347}ayam||3.14||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14c {\b kaut{\u363}hala{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; kot{\u363}hala{\u176} {Cb}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}t{\u299}va{\u7747} me] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}t{\u299}va me {Cb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }14d {\b kartaya] }  {\i eme. }; k{\u299}rtaya {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}sa{\u7747}{\u347}ayam] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7717} {Cb}{Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note <SKT>dharma</SKT> as a neuter noun and the form <SKT>at{\u299}va{\u7747}</SKT> for <SKT>at{\u299}va</SKT> metri causa. 
        My emendation from <SKT>k{\u299}rtaya</SKT> (`declare') to <SKT>kartaya</SKT> (`cut') was influenced by the combination
        of <SKT>chindhi</SKT> and <SKT>sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya</SKT>, often with <SKT>kaut{\u363}hala</SKT>, elsewhere in the VSS:
                3.2b: <SKT>sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7747} chindhi tattvata{\u7717}</SKT>; 
                10.XXcd: <SKT>kaut{\u363}hala{\u7747} mahaj j{\u257}ta{\u7747} chindhi sa{\u7747}{\u347}ayak{\u257}rakam</SKT>;
                15.2ab: <SKT>etat kaut{\u363}hala{\u7747} chindhi sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7747} parame{\u347}vara</SKT>. 
                The reading <SKT>k{\u299}rtaya</SKT> may have been the result of the influence of <SKT>k{\u299}rtit{\u257}</SKT> in 3.13b above 
                       (De Simini's convinicing observation).}

\par anarthayaj{\u241}a uv{\u257}ca| 

\par {\u347}rutism{\u7771}tidvayor m{\u363}rtir dharmasya parik{\u299}rtit{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15a {\b {\u347}ruti{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u347}ruti{\u7717} {Cb}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15ab {\b {\u176}dvayor m{\u363}rtir dha{\u176}] }  {Ca}; {\u176}dvayo m{\u363}rti dha{\u176} {Cb}{Na}{Nb}, {\u176}dvay{\u299} m{\u363}rti dha{\u176} {Nc}, 

                                                                                        {\u176}dvayor m{\u363}rti dha{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15b {\b {\u176}k{\u299}rtit{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; {\u176}k{\u299}rttita{\u7717} {Nb}, k{\u299}rttit{\u257}{\u7717} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }The reading <SKT>{\u176}dvay{\u299}</SKT> in {Nc}\ in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> a is attractive, but as Judit 
                        Törzsök has pointed out to me, it is probable that
                        the slightly less convincing but widespread variant <SKT>{\u176}dvayor</SKT> is original.}

\par d{\u257}r{\u257}gnihotrasambandham ijy{\u257} {\u347}rautasya lak{\u7779}a{\u7751}am|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15cd {\b {\u176}bandham i{\u176}] }  {\i eme. }; {\u176}baddha i{\u176} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}, {\u176}bandha i{\u176} {Nb}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15d {\b {\u347}rautasya] }  {\i eme. }; {\u347}rotasya {Ca}{Cb}{Nc}, {\u347}rautrasya {Na}, srotrasya {Nb}, {\u347}rutasya {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }15 <SKT>cf.\ Manu 3.171ab: </SKT>d{\u257}r{\u257}gnihotrasa{\u7747}yoga{\u7747} kurute yo 'graje sthite; 

               <SKT>and also Matsyapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 142.41: </SKT> 

                        d{\u257}r{\u257}gnihotrasambandham {\u7771}gyaju{\u7717}s{\u257}masa{\u7747}hit{\u257}{\u7717}|

                        ity{\u257}dibahula{\u7747} {\u347}rauta{\u7747} dharma{\u7747} saptar{\u7779}ayo 'bruvan||}

\par sm{\u257}rto var{\u7751}{\u257}{\u347}ram{\u257}c{\u257}ro yamai{\u347} ca niyamair yuta{\u7717}||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }15e {\b sm{\u257}rto] }  {\i eme. }; sm{\u257}rta {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }15ef\ ≈\ <SKT>Matsyapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 145.31: </SKT>d{\u257}r{\u257}gnihotrasambandham ijy{\u257} {\u347}rautasya lak{\u7779}a{\u7751}am|

                                sm{\u257}rto var{\u7751}{\u257}{\u347}ram{\u257}c{\u257}ro yamai{\u347} ca niyamair yuta{\u7717}||

        <SKT> ≈\ \MBh\ Indeces 1.36.10: </SKT>d{\u257}n{\u257}gnihotram ijy{\u257} ca {\u347}rautasyaitad dhi lak{\u7779}a{\u7751}am|

                                       sm{\u257}rto var{\u7751}{\u257}{\u347}ram{\u257}c{\u257}ro yamai{\u347} ca niyamair yuta{\u7717}|| }

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }To state that the Sm{\u257}rta tradition is connected to <SKT>yama</SKT>s and <SKT>niyama</SKT>s and the <SKT>{\u257}{\u347}rama</SKT>s and
        then to discuss these at length (principally in chapters 3-8 and 11) can be seen 
                                as a clear self-identification with the Sm{\u257}rta tradition.}

\par{\b [  yamaniyamabheda{\u7717} 
 ]}
\par yama{\u347} ca niyama{\u347} caiva dvayor bhedam ata{\u7717} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }16a {\b niyama{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; niyamai{\u176} {Na}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }<SKT>P{\u257}da</SKT> a should be understood as <SKT>yamaniyamayo{\u347} caiva</SKT>, but the author of this line
                may have tried to avoid the metrical fault of having two short syllables in the second and third positions.}

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} satyam asteyam {\u257}n{\u7771}{\u347}a{\u7747}sya{\u7747} damo gh{\u7771}{\u7751}{\u257}||3.16||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }16d {\b {\u176}m {\u257}n{\u7771}{\u347}a{\u7747}sya{\u7747}] }  {\i eme. }; {\u176}m an{\u7771}{\u347}a{\u7747}syo {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}, {\u176}m {\u257}n{\u7771}{\u347}a{\u7747}sy{\u257} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note that this is the beginning of a long section in our text
        that describes the <SKT>yama-niyama</SKT> rules, reaching up to the end of chapter eight. 
        The title given in the colophon of the next chapter, chapter four, namely <SKT>yamavibh{\u257}ga</SKT>,
        would fit this locus better than the beginning of that chapter, which 
        commences with a discussion on the second of the <SKT>yama</SKT>s, <SKT>satya</SKT>.}

\par dhany{\u257}pram{\u257}do m{\u257}dhuryam {\u257}rjava{\u7747} ca yam{\u257} da{\u347}a|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }17a {\b dhany{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Ed}; dhanya{\u7717} {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}, dhyanya{\u7747} {Na}{\u8226}

                 {\b m{\u257}dhurya{\u176}] }  {Ed}; m{\u257}dh{\u363}rya{\u176} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }17b {\b {\u257}rjava{\u7747} ca] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u257}rjava{\u347} ca {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note how all witnesses read <SKT>m{\u257}dh{\u363}rya</SKT> instead of <SKT>m{\u257}dhurya</SKT>. The former may have been
                acceptable originally in this text.}  

\par ekaikasya puna{\u7717} pa{\u241}cabhedam {\u257}hur man{\u299}{\u7779}i{\u7751}a{\u7717}||3.17||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }17d {\b {\u176}m {\u257}hur ma{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}m {\u257}hu ma{\u176} {Nc}}

\par{\b [  yame{\u7779}v ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} (1) 
 ]}
\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257}di pravak{\u7779}y{\u257}mi {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u{\u7779}v{\u257}vahito dvija|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18b {\b {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u{\u7779}v{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u{\u7779}va{\u176} {Na}{Nb}}

\par tr{\u257}sana{\u7747} t{\u257}{\u7693}ana{\u7747} bandho m{\u257}ra{\u7751}a{\u7747} v{\u7771}ttin{\u257}{\u347}anam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18c {\b bandho] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; baddho {Nb}, bandha {Ed}}

\par hi{\u7747}s{\u257}{\u7747} pa{\u241}cavidh{\u257}m {\u257}hur munayas tattvadar{\u347}ina{\u7717}||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }18e {\b hi{\u7747}s{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nc}; hi{\u7747}s{\u257} {Cb}{Nb}{Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}vidh{\u257}m {\u257}hu{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}vidham {\u257}hu{\u176} {Ca},

                                        {\u176}vidh{\u257}ny {\u257}hu{\u176} {Nb}, {\u176}vidha pr{\u257}hu{\u176} {Ed}}

\par k{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}halo{\u7779}{\u7789}aka{\u347}{\u257}dyais tu t{\u257}{\u7693}ayant{\u299}ha nirday{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19a {\b k{\u257}{\u7779}{\u7789}halo{\u7779}{\u7789}a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; k{\u257}{\u8768}{\u7779}{\u7789}ha{\u8768}×× {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19b {\b nirday{\u257}{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; nirday{\u257} {Ed}}

\par tatprah{\u257}ravibhinn{\u257}{\u7749}go m{\u7771}tavadhyam av{\u257}pnuy{\u257}t||3.19||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19c {\b {\u176}bhinn{\u257}{\u7749}go] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}bhinn{\u257}{\u7749}g{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }19d {\b {\u176}vadhyam av{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}vadhyavav{\u257}{\u176} {Ca}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note the use of the singular in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT>s cd referring back to the agents of the previous sentence.
                Most probably, {\u176}<SKT>vadhyam</SKT> is to be understand as {\u176}<SKT>vadham</SKT> and the form 
                        <SKT>vadhyam</SKT> serves only to avoid two <SKT>laghu</SKT> syllables in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d.}

\par baddhv{\u257} p{\u257}dau bhujora{\u347} ca {\u347}irorukka{\u7751}{\u7789}hap{\u257}{\u347}it{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20a {\b bhujora{\u347} ca] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}; bhujaura{\u347} ca {Na}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20b {\b {\u347}irorukka{\u7751}{\u7789}ha{\u176}] }  {\i eme. }; {\u347}iroruka{\u7751}{\u7789}ha{\u176} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}, {\u347}iroru{\u7717} ka{\u7751}{\u7789}ha{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Understand <SKT>bhujora{\u347} ca</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> a as <SKT>bhuje urasi ca</SKT>, in this case with an instance of double sandhi:
                <SKT>bhuje urasi ca</SKT> - <SKT>bhuja urasi ca</SKT> - <SKT>bhujorasi ca</SKT>. Alternatively, understand it as a compound:     
                                <SKT>bhujorasi</SKT>.}

\par an{\u257}hat{\u257} mriyanty eva{\u7747} vadho bandhanaja{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}||3.20||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20c {\b an{\u257}hat{\u257} mriyanty eva{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; an{\u257}hata mriya{\u7747}ty e{\u7779}a {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }20d {\b vadho bandhanaja{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}] }  {\i conj. }; {\u176}naj{\u257}{\u7717} sm{\u7771}t{\u257}{\u7717} {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb},

                                                                 {\u176}naj{\u257}{\u7717} sm{\u7771}t{\u257} {Nc}, {\u176}naja sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par {\u347}atrucaurabhayair ghorai{\u7717} si{\u7747}havy{\u257}ghragajoragai{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }21a {\b {\u176}caurabhayair ghorai{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}corabhayai ghorai {Nb}}

\par tr{\u257}san{\u257}d vadham {\u257}pnoti anyair v{\u257}pi sudu{\u7717}sahai{\u7717}||3.21||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }21d {\b anyair v{\u257}pi] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; anye c{\u257}pi {Nc}}

\par yasya yasya hared vitta{\u7747} tasya tasya vadha{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22a {\b hared vi{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; hare vi{\u176} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22b {\b vadha{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; vadha {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Understand <SKT>vadha{\u7717}</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> b as <SKT>vadhya{\u7717}</SKT> metri causa.}

\par v{\u7771}ttij{\u299}v{\u257}bhibh{\u363}t{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} tadv{\u257}r{\u257}n nihata{\u7717} sm{\u7771}ta{\u7717}||3.22||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22a {\b {\u176}bhibh{\u363}t{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}vibh{\u363}t{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }22b {\b tadv{\u257}r{\u257}n ni{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; taddv{\u257}r{\u257}n ni{\u176} {Ed}}

\par vi{\u7779}avahni{\u347}ara{\u347}astrair m{\u257}y{\u257}yogabalena v{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }23ab {\b {\u176}{\u347}astrair m{\u257}y{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}; {\u176}{\u347}astrai m{\u257}{\u176} {Nc}, {\u176}{\u347}astrair mmay{\u257}{\u176} {Ed}}

\par hi{\u7747}sak{\u257}ny {\u257}hu viprendra munayas tattvadar{\u347}ina{\u7717}||3.23||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }23c {\b hi{\u7747}sak{\u257}ny {\u257}hu vi{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Nb}{Nc}; 

                                hi{\u7747}sak{\u257}ny {\u257}hur vi{\u176} {Ca}{Na}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>), hi{\u7747}sakety {\u257}hu vi{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }<SKT>P{\u257}da</SKT> a is unmetrical.
               Note how elliptical this verse is and that <SKT>hi{\u7747}sak{\u257}ni</SKT> is neuter although it refers to 
                people, perhaps implying <SKT>bh{\u363}t{\u257}ni</SKT>. Alternatively, take <SKT>{\u176}ny{\u176}</SKT> in <SKT>hi{\u7747}sak{\u257}ny</SKT> as 
                rather unusual sandhi-bridge (<SKT>hi{\u7747}sak{\u257}-ny-{\u257}hu</SKT>). 
                Note also that <SKT>{\u257}hu</SKT> stands for <SKT>{\u257}hur</SKT> metri causa.}

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} dharma{\u7747} yas tyajet sa dur{\u257}tmav{\u257}n|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24c {\b parama{\u7747} dharma{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Ed}; parama{\u7747} dharma {Nb}, paramo dharma{\u7747} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }24d {\b tyajet sa dur{\u257}tmav{\u257}n] }  {Cb}{Nc}{Ed}; tyajec cha dur{\u257}tma¤ {Ca}, tyajet sudur{\u257}tmav{\u257}n {Na},

                                tyajet sa dur{\u257}tmanam {Nb}}

\par kle{\u347}{\u257}y{\u257}savinirmukta{\u7747} sarvadharmaphalapradam||3.24||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note <SKT>dharma</SKT> as a neuter noun in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> a and that <SKT>{\u176}vinirmukta{\u7747}</SKT> and
                        <SKT>{\u176}pradam</SKT> are neuter accordingly.}

\par n{\u257}ta{\u7717} parataro m{\u363}rkho n{\u257}ta{\u7717} paratara{\u7747} tama{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }25b {\b {\u176}tara{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}<corr>pc</corr>{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}tan {Cb}<corr>ac</corr>{Ed}}

\par n{\u257}ta{\u7717} paratara{\u7747} du{\u7717}kha{\u7747} n{\u257}ta{\u7717} parataro 'ya{\u347}a{\u7717}||3.25||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Note that <SKT>parataro</SKT> is masculine in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d, picking up a neuter <SKT>'ya{\u347}a{\u7717}</SKT>.
        This phenomenon is probably the result of <SKT>'ya{\u347}a{\u7717}</SKT> resembling a masculine noun ending in <SKT>-a{\u7717}</SKT>
                and also of the metrical problem with the grammatically correct
                        <SKT>n{\u257}ta{\u7717} parataram aya{\u347}a{\u7717}</SKT>.}

\par n{\u257}ta{\u7717} paratara{\u7747} p{\u257}pa{\u7747} n{\u257}ta{\u7717} paratara{\u7747} vi{\u7779}am|

\par n{\u257}ta{\u7717} paratar{\u257}vidy{\u257} n{\u257}ta{\u7717} para{\u7747} tapodhana||3.26||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }26d {\b para{\u7747} tapodhana] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; para tapodyam{\u257}{\u7717} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }<SKT>P{\u257}da</SKT> d (<SKT>n{\u257}ta{\u7717} para{\u7747} tapodhana</SKT>) is slightly suspicious. 
                The vocative <SKT>tapodhana</SKT> usually refers to Anarthayaj{\u241}a in these
                passages, and not to Vigatar{\u257}ga, as here.  The text may have read <SKT>n{\u257}ta{\u7717} paratamo 'dhana{\u7717}</SKT> 
                (`There is no bigger loss of wealth') or possibly something starting with
                <SKT>n{\u257}ta{\u7717} para{\u7747} tapo ...</SKT> (`There is no greater austerity...').}

\par yo hinasti na bh{\u363}t{\u257}ni udbhijj{\u257}di caturvidham|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27a {\b yo hinasti na] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; yo na hinsanti {Nb}, yo hi n{\u257}sti na {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27b {\b udbhijj{\u257}di] }  {\i eme. }; udbhij{\u257}di {Ca}{Cb}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}, udbhij{\u257}ni {Na}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}vidham] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}vidhi{\u7747} {Nc}}

\par sa bhavet puru{\u7779}a{\u7717} {\u347}re{\u7779}{\u7789}ha{\u7717} sarvabh{\u363}taday{\u257}nvita{\u7717}||3.27||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }27c {\b puru{\u7779}a{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; puru{\u7779}a{\u176} {Ed}}

\par sarvabh{\u363}taday{\u257}{\u7747} nitya{\u7747} ya{\u7717} karoti sa pa{\u7751}{\u7693}ita{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28a {\b {\u176}day{\u257}{\u7747} nitya{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Ed}; {\u176}day{\u257} nitya{\u7747} {Cb}{Nb}, {\u176}day{\u257} nitya {Nc}}

\par sa yajv{\u257} sa tapasv{\u299} ca sa d{\u257}t{\u257} sa d{\u7771}{\u7693}havrata{\u7717}||3.28||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }28c {\b yajv{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; yajy{\u257} {Nb}}

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} t{\u299}rtham ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} tapa{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }29a {\b parama{\u7747} t{\u299}{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; paran t{\u299}{\u176} {Cb}}

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} d{\u257}nam ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} sukham||3.29||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }29 <SKT> This and the following verses are similar to MBh 13.117.37-38{\u8226}

        {Cc}\ resumes here in 189.jpg, f. 273r (sic!) with </SKT> rama{\u7747} sukham <SKT> (3.30b) </SKT>} 

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} paramo yaj{\u241}a{\u7717} ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} vratam|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }30a {\b yaj{\u241}a{\u7717}] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Nb}{Ed}; yaj{\u241}ar {Ca}, yaj{\u241}a {Na}{Nc}}

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} j{\u241}{\u257}nam ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} param{\u257} kriy{\u257}||3.30||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }30c {\b parama{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; paramo {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }30d {\b param{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; param{\u257}{\u7747} {Nb}}

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} {\u347}aucam ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} paramo dama{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }31ab {\b (ahi{\u7747}s{\u257}<SKT>...</SKT> dama{\u7717})] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\i omitted in }\ {Ed}}

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} paramo l{\u257}bha{\u7717} ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} ya{\u347}a{\u7717}||3.31||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }31c {\b l{\u257}bha{\u7717}] }  {Nc}; l{\u257}bha {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}, l{\u257}bho {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }31d {\b parama{\u7747}] }  {C}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; param{\u257} {Na}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }31<SKT>After p{\u257}das cd, {Ed}\ inserts this: </SKT>

        ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} param{\u257} k{\u299}rti ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} paramo dama{\u7717}, 

        <SKT>which is not to be found in {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}</SKT>} 

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} paramo dharma{\u7717} ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} param{\u257} gati{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32a {\b dharma{\u7717}] }  {Na}{Nc}; dharma {Ca}{Cb}{Ed}, dharmo {Cc}, dha× {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32b {\b ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} param{\u257} gati{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; ×××××××× {Nb}, ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} paramo gati{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} brahma ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7717} {\u347}iva{\u7717}||3.32||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }32e {\b ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} brahma] }  {C}{Na}{Ed};

                                {\u8768}ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} parama{\u7747} brahma{\u8768} {Nb}, ahi{\u7747}s{\u257} para{\u7747}ma{\u7747} brahma {Nc}}

\par m{\u257}{\u7747}s{\u257}{\u347}an{\u257}n nivarteta manas{\u257}pi na k{\u257}{\u7749}k{\u7779}ayet|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33a {\b m{\u257}{\u7747}s{\u257}{\u347}an{\u257}n ni{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Ed}; m{\u257}ns{\u257}{\u347}ana ni{\u176} {Cc},

                                                        m{\u257}{\u7747}s{\u257}{\u347}anan ni{\u176} {Na}, mans{\u257}sanan ni{\u176} {Nb},

                                                        {\u8768}m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u347}{\u257}n{\u257}n ni{\u176}{\u8768} {Nc}}

\par sa mahat phalam {\u257}pnoti yas tu m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747} vivarjayet||3.33||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }33d {\b m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}; m{\u257}{\u7747}sa {Nb}{Ed}, m{\u257}sa{\u7747} {Nc}}

\par svam{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747} param{\u257}{\u7747}sena yo vardhayitum icchati|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34a {\b {\u176}m{\u257}{\u7747}sena] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}m{\u257}sena {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34b {\b vardhayitu{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; varddhayati {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }34 <SKT> = MBh 13.116.14ab and 13.116.34ab ≈\ Uttarottara 2.XXxx: </SKT>

                                svam{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747} param{\u257}{\u7747}sena yo dehe v{\u7771}ddhim icchati}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }See Uttarottara chapter two for a similar section on meat-consumption.}

\par anabhyarcya pit{\u7773}n dev{\u257}n na tato 'nyo 'sti p{\u257}pak{\u7771}t||3.34||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34c {\b pit{\u7773}n] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}; pit{\u7771}n {Cc}{Ed}, {\u8768}pit{\u7773}n{\u8768} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }34d {\b tato 'nyo] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; tad anyo {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }34 <SKT>≈\ Manu 5.52</SKT>}

\par madhuparke ca yaj{\u241}e ca pit{\u7771}daivatakarma{\u7751}i|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35b {\b {\u176}daivata{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}devata{\u176} {Cc}{Nb}}

\par atraiva pa{\u347}avo hi{\u7747}sy{\u257} n{\u257}nyatra manur abrav{\u299}t||3.35||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35c {\b atraiva pa{\u347}avo hi{\u7747}sy{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Nc}{Ed}; 

                                        atraiva pa{\u347}avo hi{\u7747}s{\u257} {Cb}, atraiva pa{\u347}avo hi{\u7747}sy{\u257}n {Na},

                                                        ×××××××× {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }35d {\b n{\u257}nyatra manur abrav{\u299}t] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; ××{\u8768}tra manur abrav{\u299}t{\u8768} {Nb}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }35 <SKT>≈\ Manu 5.41</SKT>}

\par kr{\u299}tv{\u257} svaya{\u7747} v{\u257}py utp{\u257}dya paropah{\u7771}tam eva v{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }36a {\b kr{\u299}tv{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; k{\u7771}tv{\u257} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}py utp{\u257}dya] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}py utp{\u257}dy{\u257}{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }36b {\b {\u176}h{\u7771}ta{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}hita{\u176} {Ed}{\u8226}

                 {\b v{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; ca {Ed}}

\par dev{\u257}n pit{\u7773}{\u7747}{\u347} c{\u257}rcayitv{\u257} kh{\u257}dan m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747} na do{\u7779}abh{\u257}k||3.36||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }36c {\b pit{\u7773}{\u7747}{\u347} c{\u257}rcayitv{\u257}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; pit{\u7773}{\u347} c{\u257}rcayitv{\u257} {Nb}, pit{\u7771}{\u347} c{\u257}rpayitv{\u257} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }36d {\b m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; m{\u257}sa{\u7747} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Parallel: }36 <SKT>= Manu 5.32 (in Olivelle's critical edition; other editions read </SKT> paropak{\u7771}ta{\u176}<SKT>) </SKT>}

\par vedayaj{\u241}atapast{\u299}rthad{\u257}na{\u347}{\u299}lakriy{\u257}vratai{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }37b {\b {\u176}{\u347}{\u299}la{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}{\u347}ala{\u176} {Cc}{\u8226}

                 {\b {\u176}vratai{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}vra{\u8768}ta{\u7717}{\u8768} {Cb}}

\par m{\u257}{\u7747}s{\u257}h{\u257}raniv{\u7771}tt{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} {\u7779}o{\u7693}a{\u347}{\u257}{\u7747}{\u347}a{\u7747} na p{\u363}ryate||3.37||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }37c {\b {\u176}v{\u7771}tt{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}; {\u176}v{\u7771}tt{\u257}n{\u257} {Nb}, {\u176}v{\u7771}tt{\u299}n{\u257}{\u7747} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }37d {\b na] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; ta {Cb}} 

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }See a similarly phrased comparison in Manu 2.86:
                <sep/>
                       <SKT>ye p{\u257}kayaj{\u241}{\u257}s catv{\u257}ro vidhiyaj{\u241}asamanvit{\u257}{\u7717} |<br/>
                        sarve te japayaj{\u241}asya kal{\u257}{\u7747} n{\u257}rhanti {\u7779}o{\u7693}a{\u347}{\u299}m ||</SKT>}

\par m{\u7771}g{\u257}{\u7717} par{\u7751}at{\u7771}{\u7751}{\u257}h{\u257}r{\u257}d ajame{\u7779}agav{\u257}dibhi{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38a  {\b par{\u7751}a{\u176}] }  {C}{Nb}{Nc}; pa{\u7751}{\u7751}a{\u176} {Na}, par{\u7751}{\u257}{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }38ab {\b {\u176}h{\u257}r{\u257}d a{\u176}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Nb}<corr>pc</corr>{Nc}{Ed}; {\u176}h{\u257}d a{\u176} {Nb}<corr>ac</corr>, {\u176}h{\u257}r{\u257} a{\u176} {Cb}{Na}}

\par sukhino balavanta{\u347} ca vicaranti mah{\u299}tale||3.38||

\par v{\u257}nar{\u257}{\u7717} phala{-}m{-}{\u257}h{\u257}r{\u257} r{\u257}k{\u7779}as{\u257} rudhirapriy{\u257}{\u7717}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }39ab {\b {\u176}h{\u257}r{\u257} r{\u257}{\u176}] }  {Cb}{Na}{Nb}; {\u176}h{\u257}r{\u257}d r{\u257}{\u176} {Ca}{Cc}{Nc}{Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }Understand <SKT>phalam {\u257}h{\u257}r{\u257}</SKT> as <SKT>phal{\u257}h{\u257}r{\u257}</SKT> (-m- is a sandhi-bridge).}

\par nihat{\u257} r{\u257}k{\u7779}as{\u257}{\u7717} sarve v{\u257}narai{\u7717} phalabhojibhi{\u7717}||3.39||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }39d {\b {\u176}bhojibhi{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}bhogibhi{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par tasm{\u257}n m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747} na h{\u299}heta balak{\u257}mena bho dvija|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }40a {\b m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; m{\u257}sa{\u7747} {Nc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }40b {\b h{\u299}heta] }  {C}{Nc}{Ed}; h{\u299}yeta {Na}{Nb}}

\par balena ca gu{\u7751}{\u257}kar{\u7779}{\u257}t parato bhayabh{\u299}ru{\u7751}{\u257}||3.40||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }40c {\b gu{\u7751}{\u257}kar{\u7779}{\u257}{\u176}] }  {\i conj. }Torzsok; gu{\u7751}{\u257}k{\u257}{\u347}{\u257}{\u176} {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}, gu{\u7751}{\u257} kury{\u257}{\u176} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }<SKT>gu{\u7751}{\u257}k{\u257}{\u347}{\u257}t</SKT> in p{\u257}da c is difficult to interpret and 
                <SKT>gu{\u7751}{\u257}kar{\u7779}{\u257}t</SKT> is a conjecture by Judit Törzsök which fits the context well,
                although the polysemy of <SKT>gu{\u7751}a</SKT> may allow for other solutions.
        <sep/>
        Verses 3.40-42 may be echoing Brahmapur{\u257}{\u7751}a 216.64-66:
        <sep/>
                      <SKT> m{\u257}{\u7747}s{\u257}n mi{\u7779}{\u7789}atara{\u7747} n{\u257}sti bhak{\u7779}yabhojy{\u257}dike{\u7779}u ca |<br/>
                        tasm{\u257}n m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747} na bhu{\u241}j{\u299}ta n{\u257}sti mi{\u7779}{\u7789}ai{\u7717} sukhodaya{\u7717} || <br/>
                        gosahasra{\u7747} tu yo dady{\u257}d yas tu m{\u257}{\u7747}sa{\u7747} na bhak{\u7779}ayet |<br/>
                        sam{\u257}v etau pur{\u257} pr{\u257}ha brahm{\u257} vedavid{\u257}{\u7747} vara{\u7717} ||<br/>
                        sarvat{\u299}rthe{\u7779}u yat pu{\u7751}ya{\u7747} sarvayaj{\u241}e{\u7779}u yat phalam |<br/>
                        am{\u257}{\u7747}sabhak{\u7779}a{\u7751}e vipr{\u257}s tac ca tac ca ca tatsamam || </SKT>
        }

\par ahi{\u7747}sakasamo n{\u257}sti d{\u257}nayaj{\u241}asam{\u299}hay{\u257}|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }41b {\b {\u176}yaj{\u241}asam{\u299}hay{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}; {\u176}dharmasam{\u299}hay{\u257} {Cc},

                                                {\u176}yaj{\u241}asam{\u299}hay{\u257}{\u7717} {Nc}, {\u176}dharmasam{\u299}haya {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }P{\u257}das ab probably stand for <SKT>ahi{\u7747}sako n{\u257}sti samo d{\u257}nayaj{\u241}asam{\u299}hai{\u7717} puru{\u7779}ai{\u7717}</SKT> CHECK
                        and are reminescent of Śivadharma{\u347}{\u257}stra 11.92:<sep/>
                              <SKT>  ahi{\u7747}saik{\u257} paro dharma{\u7717} {\u347}akt{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} parik{\u299}rtitam|<br/>
                                a{\u347}akt{\u257}n{\u257}m aya{\u7747} dharmo d{\u257}nayaj{\u241}{\u257}dip{\u363}rvaka{\u7717} || </SKT>
                <sep/>
                Note the variant <SKT>{\u176}dharma{\u176}</SKT> in both {Cc}\ and {Ed}\ in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> b.}

\par iha loke ya{\u347}a{\u7717} k{\u299}rti{\u7717} paratra ca par{\u257} gati{\u7717}||3.41||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }41c {\b ya{\u347}a{\u7717}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; ya{\u8768}{\u347}a{\u7747}{\u8768} {Cc}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }41d {\b par{\u257} gati{\u7717}] }  {Cc}{Na}{Nc}; {\u8768}par{\u257} gati{\u7717}{\u8768} {Ca}, 

                                                par{\u257}{\u7749}gatim {Cb}{Nb}, par{\u257}{\u7747} gati{\u7717} {Ed}}

\par trailokya{\u7747} ma{\u7751}iratnap{\u363}r{\u7751}am akhila{\u7747} dattvottame br{\u257}hma{\u7751}e

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }42a {\b trailokya{\u7747}] }  {C}{Na}{Nc}{Ed}; trailokya {Nb}{\u8226}

                 {\b akhila{\u7747} dattvottame br{\u257}hma{\u7751}e] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed};

                                        a{\u8768}khila{\u7747}{\u8768}¤¤¤¤¤¤¤ {Ca}, akhila{\u7747} dattottame br{\u257}hma{\u7751}e {Na}}

\par ko{\u7789}{\u299}yaj{\u241}asahasrapadmam ayuta{\u7747} dattv{\u257} mah{\u299}{\u7747} dak{\u7779}i{\u7751}{\u257}m|

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }42b {\b ko{\u7789}{\u299}yaj{\u241}asahasrapadmam] }  {Cb}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; ¤¤¤¤¤¤¤¤¤ {Ca}{\u8226}

                 {\b mah{\u299}{\u7747}] }  {Ca}{Cb}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; mah{\u299} {Cc}}

\par t{\u299}rth{\u257}n{\u257}{\u7747} ca sahasrako{\u7789}iniyuta{\u7747} sn{\u257}tv{\u257} sak{\u7771}n m{\u257}nava{\u7717}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }42c {\b {\u176}ko{\u7789}i{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; {\u176}ko{\u7789}{\u299}{\u176} {Ed}\ (<i>unmetrical</i>){\u8226}

                 {\b sn{\u257}tv{\u257}] }  {Ca}{Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}{Ed}; sn{\u257} ' {Cb}}

\par etatpu{\u7751}yaphalam ahi{\u7747}sakajana{\u7717} pr{\u257}pnoti ni{\u7717}sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7717}||3.42||

        {\footnote {\chftn ) }42d {\b {\u176}phalam ahi{\u7747}sa{\u176}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}{Ed}; {\u176}phala{\u7747} tv ahi{\u7747}sa{\u176} {Nc}{\u8226}

                 {\b ni{\u7717}sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7717}] }  {Cc}{Na}{Nb}{Nc}; ¤¤¤¤ {Ca}, ni{\u7717}sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya¤ {Cb}, ni{\u7717}sa{\u7747}{\u347}aya{\u7747} {Ed}}

        {\footnote {\chftn ) Note: }On <SKT>padma</SKT> meaning `ten trillion', and on other words for numbers, see 1.32-35. 
        <sep/>
                <SKT>ko{\u7789}{\u299}yaj{\u241}a</SKT> in p{\u257}da d may refer to a special kind of sacrifice, 
                mostly known as <SKT>ko{\u7789}ihoma</SKT> in the Pur{\u257}{\u7751}as and in inscriptions 
                (see e.g. Fleming 2010 and 2013)
                It probably involves a hundred fire-pits 
                and a hundred times one thousand br{\u257}hma{\u7751}as (hence the name `the ten-million sacrifice').
                See e.g. Bhavi{\u7779}yapur{\u257}{\u7751}a uttaraparvan 4.142.54-58:
                        <sep/>
                             <SKT>  {\u347}at{\u257}nano da{\u347}amukho dvimukhaikamukhas tath{\u257} |
                                caturvidho mah{\u257}r{\u257}ja ko{\u7789}ihomo vidh{\u299}yate || 
                                k{\u257}ryasya gurut{\u257}{\u7747} j{\u241}{\u257}tv{\u257} naiva kury{\u257}d aparva{\u7751}i |
                                yath{\u257} sa{\u7747}k{\u7779}epata{\u7717} k{\u257}rya{\u7717} ko{\u7789}ihomas tath{\u257} {\u347}{\u7771}{\u7751}u ||
                                k{\u7771}tv{\u257} ku{\u7751}{\u7693}a{\u347}ata{\u7747} divya{\u7747} yathokta{\u7747} hastasa{\u7747}mitam |
                                ekaikasmi{\u7747}s tata{\u7717} ku{\u7751}{\u7693}e {\u347}ata{\u7747} vipr{\u257}n niyojayet ||
                                sadya{\u7717} pak{\u7779}e tu vipr{\u257}{\u7751}{\u257}{\u7747} sahasra{\u7747} parik{\u299}rtitam |
                                ekasth{\u257}napra{\u7751}{\u299}te 'gnau sarvata{\u7717} paribh{\u257}vite || 
                                homa{\u7747} kuryur dvij{\u257}{\u7717} sarve ku{\u7751}{\u7693}e ku{\u7751}{\u7693}e yathoditam |
                                yath{\u257} ku{\u7751}{\u7693}abahutve 'pi r{\u257}jas{\u363}ye mah{\u257}kratau ||  </SKT>
                        <sep/>
                Note that the second syllable of <SKT>phalam</SKT> in <SKT>p{\u257}da</SKT> d is treated as a long syllable: this
                happens often at word-boundaries in this text; and 
                note how {Nc}\ aims to restore the metre by inserting <SKT>tv</SKT> after its <SKT>phala{\u7747}</SKT>.}

<TEXT> \par ||iti v{\u7771}{\u7779}as{\u257}rasa{\u7747}grahe ahi{\u7747}s{\u257}pra{\u347}a{\u7747}s{\u257} n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}yas t{\u7771}t{\u299}ya{\u7717}||\par

        {\footnote {\chftn ) } <SKT>\Colo:</SKT> {\b n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}yas t{\u7771}t{\u299}ya{\u7717}] }  {C}{Na}{Nb}; n{\u257}m{\u257}dhy{\u257}yas t{\u7771}t{\u299}ya {Nc},

                        n{\u257}mas t{\u7771}t{\u299}yo 'dhy{\u257}ya{\u7717} {Ed}}


}
